T-Rex is definitely weird, even compared
to all the other giant Tyrannosaurs that
are very closely related to it. Because
it is by far,
ludicrously by far, the largest
carnivore in its ecosystem.
>> So, it doesn't really have competition,
actually.
>> I mean, so so this is a Velociraptor
skull. There are some carnivores that
are a bit bigger than this, but not
enormously so, um which were knocking
around as T-Rex. The the skull's the
same time tooth crown. Right? But but
like you think about that. And that's
like going
going That's like going to Africa and
going, "Okay, there are lions. What's
the next biggest predator?" And it's
like, "Well, there's a weasel about this
big."
>> Yeah. Like it it's that kind of size
difference. And you don't get that
normally in ecosystems. It would eat
those the juvenile of the herbivores,
>> It's going to be eating Triceratops and
Edmontosaurus and Parasaurolophus.
There's even a couple of giant sauropods
knocking around in some places. It's
It's going to be hoovering them up. But
like how often is it going to eat
Again, Velociraptor isn't there, but how
often is it going to eat something the
size of an adult Velociraptor? I mean,
they're a fraction of our size and we're
probably too small. That That This is
like lions hunting mice. Like you're
just not going to unless one like
virtually runs into your mouth, you're
not going to go and try and eat it.
The following is a conversation with
Dave Hone, a paleontologist, expert on
dinosaurs, co-host of the Terrible
Lizards podcast, and author of many
scientific papers and books on the
behavior and ecology of dinosaurs.
This was truly a fun and fascinating
conversation.
This is the Lex Fridman podcast. To
support it, please check out our
sponsors in the description and consider
subscribing to this channel. And now,
dear friends, here's Dave Hone.
Let's start with the T-Rex dinosaur,
possibly the most iconic predator in the
history of Earth. You have deeply
studied and written about their
evolution, biology, ecology, and
behavior. So, let's uh first maybe put
ourselves in the time of the dinosaurs
and imagine we're standing in front of a
T-Rex. What does it look like? What are
the key features of the dinosaur in
front of us?
>> It's gigantic. It's almost trite now
because everyone knows T-Rex is massive.
But yes, if you actually stand in front
of one, you would be seriously impressed
just how absolutely vast they are. Um
so, I've got a copy of a T-Rex skull I
carried downstairs from my office. And
yeah, I I could fit comfortably through
its mouth. So, it would be just about
capable of swallowing me whole and I'm a
pretty big guy. Your body you can fit in
its mouth.
>> I can fit through it.
>> Wow.
>> it's not even a particularly big one.
It's a copy of the one that's in the
Smithsonian. And they get bigger than
that.
>> a two-scale copy. Yeah, yeah. Of what?
Yeah, it's a it's a cast. It's just a
giant mold made and then
pulled out like the dentist do your
teeth, but very very big. So, yeah, they
are
12-ish m long, so what's that? 14 yd.
4 and 1/2 maybe 5 to the top of the head
standing up, so another 6 yd high and
then
seven-ish metric tons, so what's that
about 8 and 1/2 short tons. So, a
colleague of mine, Tom Holtz, described
them as an orca on land. But that's it.
It is a killer whale-sized animal,
but on legs on land. And those are
massive predators. So, you're looking at
something absolutely colossal. And I
think that is what will stun you. I
think people don't realize how big a lot
of animals are,
which sounds weird. Um but I used to
work in a few zoos and something I think
you notice is when you go and see things
like elephants or giraffes or rhinos,
everything's built to the scale of the
animal. The elephant house is huge. The
doors are huge. The bars are huge. The
food is huge. And so, you don't see them
in the context of something that you
have a good frame of reference for.
And I learned this, yeah, when I was at
London Zoo and
was it going into the basement of the
old elephant and rhino pavilion and a
rhino stuck its head out from like this
gap in the wall. And the head was twice
the size I thought it was once you stood
next to it. And the same with an
elephant. I once stood next to an
elephant closer than you are to me now
and you go, "Oh Oh, they are so much
bigger than I thought." And I think it's
similar in museums. Like even when you
get up relatively close to a T-Rex
skeleton,
there's a bit of space between you and
it and then some bars and then it's
usually raised up a little bit and then
mount it on a little mount to hold the
platform and then you stand back from
that. And you don't actually get to
stand like under them.
And when you do that, yeah, you realize
that yeah, the the foot finishes at my
knee. So, is a T-Rex bigger than an
elephant? That'd be fair to say? Yeah. I
mean, a a very large Savannah African
elephant is 5 to 6 tons. And we're
looking at 7 plus. Man. And a biped.
And a carnivore.
So, yeah, you know, a a big lion A big
lion is 200 kilos, so 430 lb.
Yeah. Well, that's why That's why it
means widely considered to be probably
the most epic
uh predator in the history of Earth.
>> Yeah, I mean and I think more than that,
it's I think it's one of the most iconic
animals, period. I mean, if you're if
you're listing things that the average
person has heard of, lion, elephant,
giraffe, tiger, hippo, rhino. There's a
few more, but T-Rex is coming somewhere
up in that list. That That's how
prominent it is as an animal. So, yeah,
it's it it's almost inescapable as a
paleontologist and then doubly so for me
who works on dinosaurs and doubly so
again cuz I do work on Tyrannosaurs. But
yeah, it just dominates conversations.
>> Well, some of the other features maybe
we can go through. Big skull, big head,
small hands.
>> Massive head, very kind of boxy. It's
very robust. Um big forward-facing eyes,
massive eyes, massive I mean, tennis
ball-sized eyes. These things had
amazing eyesight. Um
Yeah, giant teeth. There's a cast of a
what? Tyrannosaurus Rex
>> tooth? Yeah, I know. So, It It It looks
a bit bigger than it is. So, this is all
root. So, this would be stuck in the
jaw. This would be something in the jaw.
>> part is that's the tooth.
>> The The tip, as you call it. And yeah,
um
you know, so that would comfortably go
through pretty much any part of the
>> Wow.
>> And then you realize just how thick it
is. So, this is a cast of a thing called
Carcharodontosaurus from um Africa. You
get it down in Niger and a few other
places like that.
And they're very very big, not as big as
T-Rex, but not a million miles away. And
then if you look at the teeth in
profile, they're a surprisingly similar
shape and not far off in size as well.
And then you look at them that way on
and you realize it's a third of the
width.
So, this isn't just massive, it's thick.
And of course, being thick, it makes it
strong. And with that giant head, with
all that extra bone and then all the
extra musculature attached to that giant
head, they've got this uber-powerful
bite and the ability to just chomp
through
basically
thing it wants to.
Um so, yeah, they they are truly unusual
in that regard, even actually compared
to a lot of the other very big
Tyrannosaurs. They're a often a kind of
step above in their proportions.
>> So, incredible crushing power in the
jaw. Yeah. And then as you say, like
this really short bull neck cuz you've
got this massive weight of this head up
front. You need to hold it up and not
tip forwards. Um really quite a massive
body. Again, there's two or three other
big carnivorous dinosaurs which people
argue are maybe they're a little bigger
than T-Rex, maybe they're a little
smaller, but it's always in terms of
length.
Which is one way of looking at things,
you know, pythons are very long, but
they're nothing like as massive as,
yeah, lion or a tiger. Same thing. T-Rex
is massive. It is built so really big
kind of barrel-shaped chest making the
body very very big as well. And so,
that's why, yeah, there's things like
Giganotosaurus and Mapusaurus in South
America. Maybe they get a bit longer,
another meter or so in length, but in
mass we're talking about maybe only 2/3
3/4. So, T-Rex is just massively bigger
than basically any other big carnivore
we know of.
Um
And then yeah, little arms, as you say.
So, this is a not great, but it's a cast
of a T-Rex arm. It's not the biggest
animal. They do get a bit bigger than
this. Um but as I love showing, it it's
not a million miles off the size of my
own.
And
I could do with a diet, but I don't
weigh 7 tons.
Yeah, it really is really pretty small.
Two claws, two fingers?
>> Yeah, so two fingers. Some you'll see
sometimes that they say there's a third.
This is a slight misnomer. So, you do
see this extra little bone here. This
doesn't turn up in all of them and it's
an extra hand bone. So, it's these the
metacarpals, but it's not supporting an
extra digit. So, mostly
functionality-wise it wasn't very
functional.
>> They're not doing very much at all. Um
you know, you've This is what's called
the deltopectoral crest. It's really
important for basically big arm
movements cuz it's deltoids and
pectorals. Um the radius and ulna are
really quite thin, thinner than ours.
The fingers are pretty stocky. The claws
look big and curved.
And they are, but other Tyrannosaurs and
indeed other carnivores generally much
more curved claws. And then they have um
these little things. Oh oh, how can I
say it? There There you can see there's
a little mark. That's a ligamentous pit.
And so, what you can imagine is if
you're trying to hold on to something
and something's wriggling, you want
grip. Mhm. And there's a risk that you
just like dislocate your fingers. So, we
have ligaments that hold bone to bone.
And if you just put it flat to flat
surface area, there's only so much you
can attach. Whereas, if you turn that
into a little hemispherical dip, you get
a lot more surface area
for your area. Mhm.
>> If that makes sense.
>> Yeah.
So, if you have a really big ligamentous
pit, it means there's a really big
ligament, which means your fingers are
really strong and they're really
resistant to being wiggled around and
pulled as if, you know, you've grabbed
something that doesn't want you to kill
it. Well, T-Rex has probably the
smallest ligamentous pits of any
Tyrannosaur.
So, that kind of suggests it's not doing
very much. And again, when you look at
the claws proportionally, they're not
that big and they're not that curved.
So, even though it looks like quite a
wicked thing to us, remember, put this
on a 7-ton animal whose individual teeth
are the size of entire fingers.
Suddenly, that arm doesn't look like
it's doing very much. What about the
feet? So, massive. Again, not
surprisingly, you're supporting a
colossal amount of weight. Um but they
have this beautiful adaptation in the
foot. So, the equivalent bones in the
foot, the metatarsals, so for us make up
the flat of the feet, but these animals
walk like birds. They've got three toes
on the ground and then the metatarsals
stick nearly vertically.
Now, that overall extends the length of
the leg, so you can walk a little bit
faster. You get a slightly bigger stride
length. Um don't worry, I've got the
right bone here.
Nice. But, they also have Yeah, there's
a good one. That one's a great one. Um
but they also have this really neat
adaptation in the middle bone. So, you
can see it on this one quite well. And
that this is actually not a Tyrannosaur.
This is an Ornithomimosaur. Um so, one
of the really ostrich-like ones,
Gallimimus from the first Jurassic Park.
Um it has the same thing. You can see
the normal bones would be really quite
long and square and then flat at the
top. And instead, this thing shrinks in
the middle and turns into this kind of
flattened diamond shape.
And what that means is
the bones either side kind of lock it.
In fact, at the top end, it actually
tends to wiggle a bit. So, it actually
goes left and then right.
And of course, what that really does is
then help these things lock together.
And so, this is an adaptation to
basically lock the foot and make it
stable.
And we see it in a whole bunch of things
independently evolved. Early
Tyrannosaurs don't have this. Early
Ornithomimosaurs don't have this. The
Overraptors, the early ones don't have
this. And the later ones acquire it in a
couple of other groups as well.
And it's about making the foot stable.
And what that really does is make the
foot energy efficient. So, you can
imagine
as an animal, you know, we we have some
cartilage and we've got some ligaments
and tendons joining all the bones
together and holding joints stable.
When you push down, that's going to
compress them to a little degree.
And when you lift that weight off,
they're actually going to spring back.
You're going to get a tiny little energy
return. It's the idea of those air soles
they put in all the trainers and stuff
in the in the '90s. It's that same
principle.
And you will, you'll get a little bit of
energy return. But of course,
big force, particularly for a big heavy
animal, it's going to take the kind of
path of least resistance. And so, if
your bones are all kind of loose in the
foot, what they're going to do is
they're going to tend to splay out and
you're actually going to lose that
energy. But if you lock the feet
together, the bones can't move and
instead, that's going to further
compress those soft tissue bits and give
you a bit more spring.
And this is all about I mean, this is
about the mobility, about the dynamics
of the movement.
>> It makes you more efficient. It means
you're putting less energy in to walk
because you're just getting a little bit
of spring off every single step. Uh I
should say that I deeply admire people
like Russ Tedrake, like the Boston
Dynamics teams, like the Tesla Optimus
robot robot teams that look at bipedal
and quadrupeds robot movement.
>> Yeah. And they try to make
human-like movement to, you know,
basically efficient movement. And so,
the question here is how the hell is a
T-Rex its size bipedal able to move
as a predator?
It's a weird body shape, is it not? I
mean, the big head makes it look more
odd, but you look at dinosaurs as a
whole and
over third pretty 40 45% is the group
called theropods, which were all
bipedal. So, T-Rex, Allosaurus,
Velociraptor, Spinosaurus, many, many
others that people may have heard of.
They're all bipedal built in this way.
There's a whole bunch of ancestral
groups which were doing something very
similar, including various crocodiles or
relatives of crocodiles. And then the
birds are bipedal. Um birds are actually
doing it in a much weirder way than
theropods are. The the theropods are
basically
a lizard on its back legs.
I'm oversimplifying a lot. I can hear
paleontologists screaming as I've just
said it's a lizard standing up. It's not
a lizard standing up. But they're doing
a lot of the same stuff in the same way.
And that is really functionally about
where you put muscles. Because what you
really want to do to walk forwards is
you want to basically pull the leg back
so that you're pushing the body off.
Mhm. And the way they do that is the
musculature on the tail. So, we don't
have a tail. And indeed, mammals that
even do have a tail, you know, elephants
and even lions, you know, it's a piddly
little thing. There's not a lot of
muscle there. But if you look at a
lizard, particularly if you look at
something like a crocodile, you see this
massive, massive block of muscle sitting
on the first third to half of the tail.
And that's what dinosaurs are doing.
It's the same thing as lizards and
crocs. They have this giant set of
muscles on the first half of the tail
that's anchoring on the femur, so the
thigh bone on the back of that. And
muscles contract. That's the one thing
they do. But now you've got a giant
muscle. Yeah, and T-Rex, this this
muscle's like 2 and 1/2 3 m long.
>> Mhm. It's going to be like this wide in
the middle. So, when that contracts, the
leg goes back. The foot stays stationary
on the ground, so the animal goes
forwards. So, the the tail is integral
to movement.
>> It is It's a huge part of the
biomechanics of the movement.
>> it with the butt. So, we're kind of
weirdly how we organize our muscles. But
there's a
This is generally probably a better way
of doing it because you can get a really
long muscle. Of course, the longer the
muscle, the more contraction you can
have. The hyper version of this is
kangaroos. So, kangaroos supposedly get
more efficient the faster they move.
They get so much energy return that when
they're moving faster,
they get more compression from the
landing,
meaning they get more spring. So, we
should be imagining this gigantic, thick
tail, big body,
>> Oh, yeah.
>> big head,
>> Yep. and
uh biped,
and how fast does it move? So, this is
one of those things that's gone
backwards and forwards and backwards and
forwards. There was a paper arguing that
we've probably been overestimating
various speeds, primarily based on
footprints. Um there's been I don't know
how many papers trying to do T-Rex
speed. The most recent one that was
pretty detailed, I think had it clocked
at
So, I think it was I think it was 25
mph, so 40 kph was the very upper end of
the estimate.
So, probably a bit less than that. What
that means it can move. Yeah. So,
That's the but that's the thing. Like
big things move quick. I've seen rhino
and hippo going at full tilt and yeah,
they're a lot quicker than you'd
think.
Um and at least part of it is simply
stride length. When your legs are
three-ish meters long, it's hard not to
cover a lot of ground with a single
step.
Um and yeah, big big theropods, T-Rex is
is going to be a power walker. It's not
going to run in the conventional
biomechanical sense where both feet are
off the ground at one time.
>> running, it's power walking.
>> Yeah. But when you've got a
4- or 5-m-long stride,
it doesn't really matter whether you're
airborne or not.
Power walking. So, you're never So, or
running, there's moments in time when
both feet are off the ground. And you're
saying likely here one foot is always on
the ground.
>> Yeah, pretty much has to be for loading.
Oh, if it just because because of the
mass of the thing.
>> Yeah, yeah, yeah. Okay. All right. The
you know, you know that's the origin of
cinema? What's that? It was the is what
This is Edward Muybridge. So, the the
origin of cinema was a bet as to whether
or not whilst running, a horse had all
four feet off the ground. And no one
really knew this for sure. And a guy
called Edward Muybridge, he was British,
but he was living in the States. He was
a keen photographer.
And he basically did what people seem
the Wachowskis do for the Matrix. He set
up a whole row of cameras and set up a
whole bunch of triggers and had a horse
run through them, so it took loads of
photos.
And lo and behold, in one of them, the
feet were off the ground. The guy won
his bet. But he also realized that we
already had things like zoopraxiscope,
you know, the little thing you spin with
a with a slit. Mhm. Um so, you see the
right. So, he did that with horses. And
now you have a moving photograph.
And that's pretty much the origin of
cinema was a bet about biomechanics.
Yeah, it's always a good question and a
bet, and there you go. You're
off to the races. Yeah. All right. All
right. So, we're standing in front of
this thing.
>> Yes. Uh how screwed are we, you and I?
We're back in the time of the dinosaurs.
What's the probability of our survival?
There's two big things to weigh up,
which are going to be interesting, which
is would they even consider us
a potential meal? Mhm. Because we know
that animals that have never Animals
have to learn stuff. And so, animals
that have never encountered things
before are often
they don't have a response because they
don't know what their response should
be. We should say during that time there
was not something that looked like
primates. No.
Absolutely nothing.
>> So we would look very weird.
>> we would look weird. Yeah.
Um so you know that there's lots of
really cool records of
um
particularly you've got down in um
Indonesia and stuff we've got these
insane volcanic spires and at least of
these tiny little valleys. And people go
in there and they go, "Yeah, the animals
walk up to us. They've never seen a
human. They don't know what it is."
So it might look at us and animals are
fundamentally cautious.
It doesn't know if we're a threat. So
maybe it might just find us weird or in
some way shape or form off-putting.
And so we may not even be considered on
the menu.
Um
the other thing is we might be too
small.
Um my suspicion is we're not. So animals
carnivores typically take stuff that is
much much smaller than them despite
basically every day I just saw a
documentary movie ever shows T-Rex
hunting an adult triceratops which is
like the same size as it.
Uh and every documentary you got to have
lions taking down a wildebeest or even a
buffalo.
Like these are weird and rare outcomes.
These don't usually happen. The vast
majority of active predation is on stuff
much much much smaller than you. I
totted some of this up for a paper I did
on microraptor this really small gliding
dinosaur from China where we actually
have a bunch of specimens with various
stomach contents in them. And we were
coming up with numbers of about like 5
to 20% of the mass being typical. So
prey versus predator. And that's
actually very similar to what we see
with modern carnivores. And it's not far
off what we've seen even with things
like Tyrannosaurus where you
occasionally find consumed bones from
prey.
So if we put the lower end of that is 5%
of the mass of a T-Rex, we might
actually be okay
um if it doesn't consider us worth the
hassle.
Then
assuming you're encountering a big adult
and not a half-size one that's maybe
only weighs a ton, then we might be all
right.
>> What would be the survival strategy? So
the there's a thing that you criticized
not being true that I guess in Jurassic
Park
uh not moving.
>> Yeah, it's nonsense. They they can see
really well. Like I said, like T-Rex has
giant eyeballs. People don't realize
that cuz like whales and like elephants,
it looks small compared to the size of
the animal. But what you're in really
important for vision is absolute size
not proportional size. And absolutely
their eyes are gigantic.
>> Probably the biggest on Earth at that
time. Yeah, uh guy called Kent Stevens
did a paper. He's got a really nice
graphic of it. If if you if you just put
s t e v e n s T-Rex.
There's the one with the There we go.
That's the one with the with the googly
eyes. That's a baseball or a tennis ball
size eyeball. And when you think about
the incredible visual acuity of
something like an eagle
which has eyes not much bigger than
ours,
think about what that's going to do. And
we we absolutely know there's been loads
of studies on this in mammals and birds
and other things as well that
basically eyeball size correlates with
visual acuity. And that can fold in two
different ways. It can be like general
sharpness, like how well can you see a
long way away? So eagles and vultures
it's really important. Or it can be good
in low light.
And I now discovered that there's a
nature was metal Oh yeah. Reddit. Yeah,
yeah. For which is gnarly gnarly paleo
things. Yeah. Yeah, I come across it
occasionally. For dinosaurs, let's see
what's the top post of all time.
Oh, that's a glyptodont. An Argentinian
farmer recently found it. 20,000 years
old fossilized So these are these are
giant armadillo-like animals with club
tails.
Interesting. Wow. Oh, that's Black
Beauty. That's at the Royal Tyrrell
Museum. So giant eyeballs, they can
either see very well they can see a very
long way in daylight or they can see
very well at night. My suspicion is it's
the latter. I think they're probably
primarily nocturnal when when they get
that size. And that moving might be a
good strategy because it's cautious cuz
it doesn't understand what these
primates are. Yeah, um but I think if it
if it starts coming towards you,
if you're truly in the open, then you're
in real trouble and I'm not sure what
you do. I mean the one thing the one
advantage humans have over almost
anything else on Earth there's a handful
of exceptions is we have range. I can
pick up a rock and hurl it with
reasonable accuracy.
Most things can't do that. And animals
probably don't like being hit in the
face or hit in the eyes with a rock at a
range cuz again they're not going to
know how it's happened or how to respond
to this. All they know is they're taking
damage and that's bad. And that might
genuinely be enough to do it. I wouldn't
want to try,
but again if I was
dumped on a plane or a prairie with
nothing else but a T-Rex that was
interested in me,
it's worth a shot. Um if you're in a
forest, I would try and get behind a
tree. They they're quite good at
turning. There's been a couple of nice
papers looking at like the the mechanics
of the foot and the ankle and how
quickly they could like pivot.
Um but we're much better cuz we're just
so much smaller. So it it would be very
kind of Looney Tunes, but I think you
could go round and round a big tree
right Yeah, but much faster than it
could. Yeah. And so
it's going to get bored or lack interest
sooner or later. So let's zoom out. What
did it eat?
I mean the you could go for the classic
joke of whatever it wanted, but the
reality is um
the relatively big herbivores that are
around at the time,
it's probably largely leaving them alone
because again just the classic dynamics
of
predators even like quote super
predators like Tyrannosaurus, they're
still real animals. If you get injured
and you can't hunt, that's probably the
end of you. So you don't want to tackle
an adult triceratops that weighs the
same as you and has meter meter and a
half long horns on its head
and
is potentially pretty aggressive um and
then even the big uh so the hadrosaurs
are kind of classic duck-billed
dinosaurs. They're not they're not
present with any like obvious defenses.
They don't have armor. They don't have
horns or spikes or anything like this.
But they're simply massive. Again, you
know, yes T-Rex has got the teeth and
the bite and
even if they're a bit rubbish the claws
on the hands. But like just grappling
another animal which is the same size as
it, there's a risk you're going to get a
foot trodden on that it's going to get
off some kind of body slam or whatever.
And then even if you do bring it down,
you're never going to eat it.
Like if you you you bring down an animal
that weighs 5 tons, it's nearly your own
mass. You're not you're not going to eat
it before it goes rotten. That's a huge
amount of kind of not like wasted
energy, but you probably put a lot of
effort into this and you're not getting
that much reward out. And again, the
there are again there are exceptions.
You've got things like links are the
classic one. Links are not very big cats
and yet they'll hunt adult deer. They're
way bigger than them.
Lions hunt things like buffalo, but
they're operating in a group so it's a
bit of a cheat. So there are some things
that do this, but fundamentally the vast
majority of carnivores tackle stuff
that's way way smaller than them.
And that's what we see.
Um every record we have of basically any
large carnivorous dinosaur where you
have stomach contents where it's like
consumed something or healed bite marks.
We get quite We get a not quite a few.
There's a handful of them where there's
an obvious damage to a bone in more than
a couple of cases with a tooth broken
off in the bone and then the bone has
healed over it so you know it got away.
They're they're juveniles. They're
relatively young animals. And that's
what they're targeting.
Um
it makes ecological sense. It's what
modern animals do for very good reason.
Juveniles are relatively small and weak.
They don't have the horns or frills or
armor or shields and other stuff.
They're naive. They don't They have You
don't have to learn what predators are
or you have to learn how to avoid them
or to check the wind or
even physically see them before you know
see them kill something else before you
know that they're a threat. And
juveniles forage badly.
Um they're relatively inefficient. So
actually they need to eat more for their
size than an adult does.
And then on top of that they're not very
experienced at foraging in the right
areas. And even if they can find a good
patch, the adults will often beat them
up and chase them off.
>> You're talking about juveniles across
various species? Everything. This is
just a universal pattern of being a
smaller animal versus a larger or a
younger animal versus a larger animal.
>> So so hunting young
young things.
>> young things is easier cuz they're dumb.
Right, they're dumb, but they're
inexperienced. But they're but they're
often they're often feeding in
sub-optimal areas. So this is the place
with all the best food. The adults will
kick you off so now you have to feed
somewhere else. Maybe the food isn't as
good in which case you need to eat more
of it so it takes longer. Or maybe it's
the one next to the edge of the forest
where the T-Rexes hide. But either way
you're stuck there. And then you don't
really know what you're looking for and
you haven't got the armor.
So guess who's getting eaten. Like this
is
again there's lots of exceptions. You
can't have nature without things like
that, but this is the absolute rule of
thumb for how foraging and growth and
predation operate across everything from
fish to stuff as fish as predators
starfish praying mantis all the way up
to things like big cats by stuff like
crocodiles. It It's how it works. So,
it'd be very weird if it didn't also
operate for dinosaurs. And then, as I
say, we've actually got the direct
evidence for this from bite marks and
stomach content. They've taken small
stuff. Bite marks give a lot of
information. Yeah. That's a powerful
signal in paleontology. Yeah,
absolutely. I've done really quite a lot
of work on it, and they can tell you an
awful lot
if you've got the right understanding of
the burial conditions, because you
weird thing that I think a lot of people
don't appreciate is you basically can't
take fossils at face value, particularly
when you're trying to get into stuff
like behavior and ecology, because
so between the animal dying and the
paleontologist digging it up,
potentially quite a lot has happened.
And that's where it's really easy to
start misinterpreting things, because if
you just go I I had one like this not
too long ago, where I was an editor on a
paper. And the the authors had done a
pretty good job, to be fair, but it was
this discussion of whether or not
several animals were together at the
time of their death. Mhm. They had
multiple
um theropods together in this quarry.
And it's like, right, but there was
loads of debris, and you had loads of
things like fish scales and other small
bones. And it's like, okay, but this
looks like these animals died
potentially died somewhere else,
and then a flood or a river washed them
into this bay or a channel, or it then
the water level dropped, and they ended
up together.
But that doesn't necessarily mean they
were together when they died.
And so, just cuz you've got
three animals together,
what is the potentially the story of how
they got there? So, you have to consider
multiple explanations, and then try to
figure out what is the most likely.
>> Yeah, or what can you test with various
bits of evidence. So, there was some uh
Tyrannosaur inflicted bite marks on a
duckbill from Mongolia that I worked on
years ago. The specimen was from
Mongolia, but it was held in Japan in a
Japanese museum. I was working with the
Japanese on it. And
I'm I'm not a taphonomist, or the study
of like decay in the history of
specimens, and I am in no way, shape, or
form a geologist. I did zoology for my
degree. Um but the guys I was working
with, like, they were really hot on
erosion and damage.
And they were looking at some of the way
the bones had been damaged, and they're
like, okay, we're pretty confident that
the bite marks
are sitting on top of erosion. What does
that mean? So, it means that the animal
had died, uh and it was found in a It
was found in sand-covered, but in what
would have been a river channel. So,
this animal has died, washed downstream,
ended up on a sandbank.
The sand is whipping past, cuz I've been
in a sandstorm
in China, and it is not fun. And that's
starting to etch some of the bones and
damage them. And after that, there's a
bite mark?
>> After that, you're getting bite marks
coming in.
So, that can only be scavenging. That
thing has been dead and sitting out for
days, possibly weeks, before something
came along and chewed on it. It pretty
much can't have happened any other way.
>> have to take these really subtle signals
to to reconstruct the story.
>> But then, you can start piecing some
other stuff together. So, in this case,
the skeleton is pristine. It's one of
the best hadrosaur skeletons out there.
It's certainly the best from Mongolia
I've ever seen.
Um and all the bite marks are on one
bone, the humerus, the upper arm bone.
Every Every mark. We We went over the
rest of the skeleton, nothing. And then,
the humerus is
chewed to bits. There's bites all over
it. But when you look, there's two
really distinctive patterns. There's
deep circular punctures. And remember
what the shape of this thing looks like.
Yeah. At the ends,
and then along the deltopectoral crest,
okay, it's much, much bigger in a
hadrosaur, but this bit, but remember,
that's where all the big muscles attach,
there's all of these types of This is
from a different bone, but different
animal, but all these types of close,
parallel scratches.
And so, that looks like selective
feeding, because it's using its giant
crunchy teeth at the ends to
get the bone off. And this is off a
buried skeleton.
And then, it's got these Actually, T-Rex
has really small teeth at the front of
its mouth, right right in the front
where our incisors are. They're called
incisiform teeth. They look like
incisors. They're a fraction of the size
of the big ones. Um and they've got a
really weird flat back. Mhm.
And that's what these are. It's hitting
this with
the front of the mouth and pulling. And
that's mostly for eating. Yeah. And
that's why it's just on the
deltopectoral crest, cuz that's where
all the muscles are. Mhm. So, it's I
always liken it to getting something
like an Oreo, and you take the top off,
and then you scrape the cream out with
the teeth.
I think most people have done that.
Yeah. Right? But But that's what it's
doing. So, it's got this little row of
teeth, Yeah. and everywhere you get lots
of muscle, you get little rows of teeth
together. So, there's different bite
marks for sort of fighting, killing, and
then there's different bite marks for
eating.
>> Yeah. So, it kills and dismembers with
the big teeth up the side, and then it
feeds with the little front teeth.
>> And all that has evidence Yeah. in the
bones. Yep. What hunting strategy does
it use? Can we figure that out?
>> So, that comes down to the um to that
foot stuff. Um
they're relatively efficient compared to
a lot of other things, and particularly
compared to the herbivores. So, that
means they're probably looking at long
distance rather than speed. And that
makes sense, cuz even though the kind of
stuff we're talking about, like I said,
maybe they're getting to 20, 25 mph,
that's pretty quick, but some of the
smaller stuff is going to be a lot
faster than that. And remember, that's a
real upper estimate. They're They're
probably not that quick.
But yeah, So, they're just jogging after
you. Right. But But they've got They've
got the distance. So, yeah. So, it It's
much more uh Yeah. I'm hyena- or
wolf-like strategy than like a cheetah
going for hyper-speed, or a lion going
for a relatively quick burst, and it
either gets you or it doesn't. And then,
you the people kind of I just go, well,
like, but that's ridiculous. Like, you
They're not even that quick. And it's
like, yep, but if you're hunting
something big, that's not that quick,
either. And so, that That's a
misconception. Like, when I'm talking
about juvenile dinosaurs, I don't mean
just out of the egg and weigh a kilo.
Like, a juvenile Triceratops could still
weigh a ton,
and be the size of a rhino. They're not
that fast. And again, if you get a head
start on them, because as I said, I
suspect they're nocturnal.
So, cuz that's the other thing. It's
really hard to hide a T-Rex. Even lions
and tigers struggle to kind of hide in
long grass.
When you're 3 and 1/2, 4 m tall,
like, you you can't hide. Maybe in a
forest, but even then, you're probably
going to stick out, and it's going to be
hard to maneuver between the trees. And
we've got big Tyrannosaurs living in
what we know to have been relatively
open environments. Maybe there's some
stands of trees, but it's not like a
woodland or a forest or anything like
that. So, they're living in the open and
surviving in the open. So, they've got
to have a way of doing this. And I think
it's either or some combination of being
nocturnal, so it's
you relatively easy to Sneak isn't quite
the wrong word, but approach things to
cut the the distance down for your
initial strike, and then just running
them down. Because, yeah, maybe
a 1-ton Triceratops or 1-ton Hadrosaur
is rather faster than you,
but if you've covered the first couple
of hundred meters to get up to your top
speed before they start running,
then you're probably much closer to
them.
And then, will they exhaust faster than
you'll keep going?
Well, probably not 100% of the time. No
predator's that effective. But I suspect
that's what they're doing. And it fits
with what we know of their size, their
vision. They've got a very good sense of
smell. Again, that makes sense at night.
It makes less sense if you're diurnal
and operating primarily in the day.
And you got to hide this thing. And
then, we know they're pretty efficient
versus relatively fast, but not that
efficient prey.
Well, there's a bit of a debate of
scavenger versus hunter. They're They're
obviously both. A, because we've got
things like the bite marks I just
described, which is pretty much
definitive scavenging. And then, we've
got the healed bite marks with T-Rex
teeth buried in bones, which is pretty
much definitive active predation.
So, we've got evidence of it doing both.
But can we possibly figure out what was
the primary strategy? That gets much
harder. My guess is they're probably
still primarily
uh actively carnivorous. Because if you
look at stuff that's reliant on being
a
uh scavenger, um I mean, the true
scavengers, like the vultures and
condors and stuff like this, you have to
be ultra-long-distance, very
energy-efficient travelers. You know,
they're they're soaring soaring in
thermals. They're barely using any
energy to fly. It It's It's really hard
to to get very far. How far were they
spread? Where did they Where did they
live?
>> So, the ones we found, you've got them
from Alberta down to probably New
Mexico. There's some I want to say
there's some Tyrannosaurine,
so very close to T-Rex teeth, that may
or may not be T-Rex in New Mexico.
There's similar teeth in Mexico proper,
down in Coahuila. Um so, about halfway
down Mexico. Mongolia, also, aren't
they? So, Mongolia, you have a thing
called Tarbosaurus, which is very, very
close relative of T-Rex. It's the
nearest
species or nearest genus that we have.
Um but T-Rex is probably occupying
almost all of western North America. So,
at times, the east was kind of split off
and and separate.
>> But the entire surface of Earth had
dinosaurs on it.
>> Oh, yeah.
>> Most of it.
>> Yeah, we We've got them in Antarctica.
We've got them in Antarctica even close
to the mass extinction event.
>> Just an insane number of dinosaur
species all over the earth. Just the
same kind of variety we have in the
animal kingdom today. You just have in
the dinosaur. I mean this is this is
like how many dinosaur species were
there? I don't know. I mean I basically
wrote an entire book chapter about this
because there's so many.
But this would make the number high, but
this would make the number low, but this
would make the number high, but this
would make the number lower. Counter
versus counter arguments
that you can guesstimate almost any
number and probably be
very accurate or very far out.
>> Yeah, but we should say that a large
number of dinosaur species are
constantly being discovered.
>> Yeah, so we've named
give or take in the realm of 1500, 1600
valid species. That that is not everyone
agrees on every species, but most people
would be satisfied with that number.
But we also name in the realm of 40 to
50 a year and we've been doing that for
at least the last 10, 12 years. That
number is rocketing up. Shows no signs
of slowing down. There's loads of like
we still never really explored India
very much. We're starting to find
entirely new beds in places like
Ecuador.
Um
Argentina we know has a ton of stuff,
but we've never excavated there very
much. Australia we know there's a ton of
stuff we haven't excavated there very
much.
Um so there's lots of places
even now to still
go through. This a good moment to take a
brief tangent and look at paleontology.
So how how do we how do we find these
fossils? What's the
What's the magic? What's the science?
The art?
>> The same way more or less that people
did in the 1750s or whenever you first
start getting them. That there's
for dinosaurs in particular, but this is
true of the vast majority of stuff.
There's essentially two ways of doing
it. The simple one is
where you have quarries of particularly
things like lithographic limestone, so
the printing limestones
or stuff that's very similar to that. Uh
sometimes it's often volcanic. Um you
get these super super super fine layers
of sedimentation and that's where you
get these places of exceptional
preservation. Whenever you see like the
feathers or almost always when you see
feather dinosaurs it's like oh we got
the skin, we got the claws and like the
whole skeletons laid out. So
Archaeopteryx being like the the first
bird being absolute classic example,
it's from these beds.
And there you find them by basically
splitting limestone. We don't usually
dig for them. It's because there are
quarry workers and people who are
already doing this because the stone is
useful because there might be one decent
fossil for every, you know, few hundred
tons of rock you shift. In which case
you could get every paleontologist in
the world there for a couple of years
and you wouldn't find very much. You
rely on the fact that there's hundreds
of guys doing this constantly. And then
sooner or later they'll find something
and then you've got it.
That's the super easy way.
The only slightly more complicated way
is you go to somewhere where
geologically we know it's the right age
and it's the right kind of rock and
ideally fossils have been reported from
there before.
And again, you know, geologists map all
the world's geology years ago in quite a
lot of detail. There's There's gaps.
There's places where we don't have the
details, but in general we know. And
then you go there and then you walk
around and you look. And that's
basically it. And you're looking for
something that's sticking out of the
rock. Yeah, so you always get the
So there's this
constant and I think, you know,
borderline myth of the idea that
dinosaurs and mammoths and lots of other
fossil things like entered lots of
indigenous cultures because it's
impossible that the guys were wandering
around say Dakota and the Native
Americans didn't come across some
dinosaur fossils.
That I'd agree with. It's pretty much
impossible they didn't come across some
dinosaur fossils. Did they come across a
whole skeleton laid out on the ground?
No, because those don't usually exist.
Because even if they're tougher or It
doesn't matter if they're tougher or
weaker than the surrounding rock.
Dinosaur bones are, you know, in some
way, shape or form they're lithified.
They They turn to rock and they will
absorb some of the minerals from
whatever they've been buried in.
And so even in places like Mongolia and
northern China where I've been to where
actually the the fossil bone is quite a
lot tougher than the sandstone that it's
embedded in. Like you can find a bit of
bone and pull it out like almost like
rub it with your hands and the the sand
comes off and there's your bone. They
will decay pretty quickly. You know,
sandstorms, you know, sand just etches
stuff. Um the tiniest bit of moisture
particularly in winter gets into the
cracks. Bones are incredibly porous.
That freezes, that expands, that cracks.
Bones just shatter.
And yeah, you find shattered bone on the
surface everywhere. What you rarely find
is a decent bone on the surface let
alone a skeleton.
>> So there has to be something that's
sticking out just a tiny bit so that you
can see it
but it's still buried.
Right. And it And it happened. The The
The greatest one that I saw or that that
I didn't see it happened but it was with
a friend of mine when we were in um
northern China and he went yeah, I can
see a bit of a claw sticking out of a
hill. And it was. It was like this this
this much. You could see, you know, less
than a centimeter coming out of a
hillside.
And it's like so You know, that's the
dream, right?
>> Dig a little bit and there's a little
bit more. Dig a little bit there's a
little bit more. Dig a little bit
there's a little bit more. Okay. And
then the system we were running there is
some guys were searchers and some guys
were diggers. So he and I were searchers
and we told okay, you guys have You guys
he found it. You found something go and
look for something else, we'll dig it
out. And so we come back a couple of
days later and check in on the digging
team. So what is it again? Oh it's a
complete skeleton.
And it was. It was a thing very, very
close relative of um Velociraptor. Ended
up naming it Linheraptor so the raptor
from Linhe which was the nearest town.
And it was yeah, the legs were a little
messed up because water had got to them
and the end of the tail was missing and
that was about it.
So like 90 plus percent complete
skeleton and it had been found with
you know, 5 mil, a couple of 16ths of an
inch of bone sticking out of a hill. And
that's what you want because every so
often behind that is a whole skeleton.
If you're looking for skeletons on the
surface they're going to be gone before
you get to them. And when it's a near
complete skeleton, you you did a show of
uh terrible lizards on Stan. Oh yeah.
>> fossil that sold for 31.8 million
dollars.
>> some of that. So that that's a nice sort
of
big adult T-Rex. So looking at a fossil
like this Yeah. sold for 31.8 million
dollars, what's the excavation process
for when you have a claw sticking out
like you were mentioning and getting
that whole thing out without damaging
the bones? What can you say about that
process? So it depends where you are. It
depends how many people you've got. It
depends on your budget and it really
depends on the rock. So again, like
going into China and Mongolia where this
little guy is from the bone tends to be
relatively strong compared to the
sandstone that it's in. That also That
means that A it's fairly tough and
resistant.
Um but it also means that uh it's really
easy to dig. Like again, I've I've dug
stuff by almost like pulling it with my
hands or like getting my fingers in.
Getting something like a chisel or a
hammer you can just cruise through this
rock. But like you have to be really
careful not to touch the bone, I guess.
So it depends how how strong it is. So
again, so some bone is incredibly
strong, some isn't because they've all
fossilized differently.
Um what we're usually doing is applying
glue to it though. There's this um
wonderful stuff called Paraloid and it's
a special glue for fossils. And as I
said, bones super porous. So it's really
good at sucking up liquids.
>> you're basically filling it with glue so
it like makes it stronger. Yeah, and
Paraloid's really great because you can
dissolve
it with acetone and it basically doesn't
react with anything. So you can fill
your fossil with glue, but then if you
want to take all that glue back out
again.
>> Very cool. Um so yeah, what you would
normally do is for for something say in
China
um where the rock is relatively soft uh
and the bone's relatively tough and um
where we don't have any like manpower
and shipping problems, which is a real
issue in other places
you basically map out where you think
the skeleton's going. So um
in the same way that you were doing it
like, you know, if you can imagine
like a cake or something and someone
said oh I put a toy dinosaur in there
and you you've you've got to find it
without damaging it. So like well you'd
stick your finger in the cake and just
kind of dig until you hit the edge of it
and then you'd go in somewhere else and
go in and that's what we're doing. We're
just going in from kind of all sides and
once you've hit three or four bones you
kind of know which way it's
it's going into the hillside. Usually
sometimes they're very weird and mixed
up. And then you can just like almost
trace the outline of it. And then you'll
just dig all the way around that which
might involve taking the top off a
mountain depending on where you are. In
the desert it tends to be a bit easier.
But yeah, we we've had stuff where like
the first three days is just 10 people
with pickaxes just digging a hole to get
down to the right level. But sometimes
the excavation requires like large
equipment, right?
>> Yeah, we've used jackhammers and stuff.
We've We've used a backhoe. We've just
literally driven it into the desert and
just dug a big hole next to the the to
the fossil. Um and then the classic
thing of covering it in a plaster of
Paris jacket, strip strips of burlap
sacking plaster of Paris and some water,
wooden beams if you want to make
something really big and really solid,
and just basically wrap it all up,
and then take it out.
And that's again, that's what they were
doing 150-200 years ago. That that that
hasn't changed. Where it gets more
complicated is if you've got really hard
rock,
very hard to get through, particularly
if the bone is fragile,
then it becomes difficult because if you
want to like get a jackhammer in, the
vibrations means you're going to shatter
your bones before you've even cut
through the rock. So then you might be
down to doing it manually.
And there you was like Yep. Hand hand
chip chipping it out. Yeah, the the
other the other way you end up with that
is
like the classic Jurassic Park thing,
like the the
Was it the second scene? And they're
digging in the desert and there's the
whole skeleton laid out and five or six
guys all all digging digging round it
and exposing it.
And that's actually quite common in the
States.
And the reason is a huge amount of those
excavations are being done on
government land. They're national parks
or whatever or or or protected land, and
very often the rules are you're not
allowed wheeled vehicles.
Full stop at all to protect the
environment. You can walk in and walk
out, but you can't drive.
And it's like, well all right, when
we're in the desert in Mongolia or in
China or China or Mongolia and we're
allowed to do this, literally, yeah, my
my boss drove into town, hired a guy
with with a JCB, he drove out, picked it
up with the bucket, drove it back into
town, and put it on the back of a
flatbed, and we drove it to Beijing.
If you're out in a protected area and
you can't, you've got two choices. You
can take it out by hand, but that means
it's got to be light enough that half a
dozen people can lift it, which if it's
a block of stone the size of this desk,
you know, a couple of meters by a couple
of meters by meter high, is basically
impossible.
So that means you either got to carve
chunks off, so take the head off, take
the arm off and whatever,
and you can get it out that way, but
it's not ideal. There's always the risk
of breaking, you're losing some
information, and if you want to make a
really spectacular display, you don't
want to join
through every big bit of bone. You you
want to show the public one one piece.
So the alternative is to get rid of
every bit of rock you possibly can to
make it light enough to helicopter it
out.
And so normally, so in China, if we hit
Yeah, if we hit that bit of bone going
in, we're just like going in round the
sides until we've hit it, take the top
off, take the bottom off, and just take
it. So the skeleton is completely
encased in rock, and it's as safe and
secure as it can be,
and then we'll do the preparation work
back at the lab.
>> That's heavy though. That's real heavy.
>> If you're going to have to lift it with
a helicopter and they've got a weight
limit of only a couple of tons,
or if it's not, then you need to pay
twice as much for a much more expensive
helicopter, then you take off every gram
of rock that you think you can to get
the weight down so you can ship it. So
so it varies massively. Yeah, and
something the size of Stan,
that's that's months of work. You're
you're probably doing that across three
or four years with a team of half a
dozen people.
>> So can we just talk through cuz just
using Stan as a case study, Stan was
first discovered in the spring of 1987
by amateur paleontologist
well, Stan
Second Son in
Hell Creek Formation near Buffalo, South
Dakota.
>> But it was the Larson brothers from the
Black Hills Institute who dug it up. And
so they're they're a commercial outfit.
So they dig stuff up to sell it. Um but
they also make casts and sell them.
Um this Oh, I brought my other I do have
a cast a cast of one of Stan's teeth. Um
so like you can buy casts of Stan's
teeth, you could buy casts of the head,
um you could buy the whole skeleton.
>> It's a famous skeleton. You you see Stan
in a whole bunch of different places.
There's a there's a Stan just up the
road from here at Oxford. Oxford's got a
cast of Stan. Oh. Um I was just at Lyme
Regis, uh the famous fossil locality in
the south of the UK a couple of weeks
ago. One of the fossil stores has a
skull of Stan in the window. So Stan
Stan turns up again and again and again.
>> So the process is written here involved
removing the overlying rock using heavy
equipment like a Bobcat.
>> Yes, we'd call that the overburden, the
extra stuff. That's all the rock that's
sitting above the layer with our fossil
in. And when you're lucky, that's a foot
of sandstone and you shovel it out in an
hour. And I've seen guys in South
America There was a team in Argentina. I
think it was my old boss Ollie Rauhut
showed me this.
And they took like 20-30 feet off the
top of a hill
to get down
to this fossil.
You know, so so something, you know,
it's a pretty half an acre in size,
20-30 feet of rock. I want This is
incredible. I wonder if you can speak to
some of these other components.
Carefully extracting each fossil bone by
hand with picks and brushes, plotting
and diagramming the bones using a grid
system at the dig site, wrapping the
bones in burlap and plaster for safe
transport to the BHI lab. Some of the
stuff you've spoken to. What's the
What's with the diagramming? What's with
the plotting of the
>> So yeah, so you may well have seen
something like this for archaeology
shows or something like that. Um
nowadays, again, tech's getting better.
People are using drones and stuff for
this or taking hundreds of photos and
then building photogrammetry models.
You've just got a 3D model in the
computer.
>> Or just kind of modeling what we're
looking at here.
>> Yeah, but but where you found
everything. So it goes back to that
stuff we were saying about the process
of fossilization or the or the process
of what's happened to that animal
from death to discovery is, okay, it
All right, a classic thing is bones
being in a line.
So you can imagine if, you know, bones
are lots of weird shapes, but mostly, or
at least certainly lots of bones, ribs,
arms and legs, things like this, they're
quite long bones. So if they're in a
current, they will tend to spin in the
axis so that they are facing the
current. So if you're finding all the
bones are in a line,
that probably tells you that this thing
has had quite a lot of water washing
over it. Mhm, got it.
>> You're then probably going to be missing
most of the small bones cuz the big
heavy bones won't be shifted by that
current, but maybe the small ones will.
How does he actually model where the
bone where where you're likely to find
the bones, the big bones, the small
bones?
>> might it might tell you where to go and
dig further down the hill, quite
literally, but it can also just tell
you, okay, this thing there's no way
this thing died here. It absolutely got
moved. So we need to factor that in when
we're trying to interpret it. Okay. Or
we've got this one weird bone and we
can't work out what on earth it is.
Well, maybe it's from something else cuz
if we know a whole bunch of stuff washed
together, maybe that's a random bone
from a different animal. Yeah, maybe
that was eaten or there might be a
different story if it was washed
like you like you were describing.
>> Any of that kind of thing. So that's
where you want to have as much
information as possible. It says here,
once it's a lab, the bones underwent
more than 30,000 hours of cleaning,
preservation, restoration, and
documentation. And uh
Stan's skeleton is notable for its high
degree of completeness, about 70% by
bulk, 63% by bone count, and the
exceptional preservation of its skull,
which has become a scientific standard
for the species. Yeah. So there's this
unbelievably beautiful skeleton,
Borealopelta. This is this is a
helicopter lift.
Um
absolutely
phenomenal preservation from from
northern Alberta.
>> It's full name is Borealopelta
markmitchelli, and it's called
markmitchelli named after Mark Mitchell,
the preparator, who basically spent I
think Mark spent the thick end of two
years on this. Like this was his job.
And he did other stuff as well. He's
doing some other prep, he's doing some
field work, but Mark basically went in
every day, 9:00 to 5:00,
cleaning the rock because the rock was
hard and the bone was soft, and it's
extraordinarily well preserved.
Borealopelta is a genus of plant-eating
armored dinosaur. Sure as hell looks
armored. This is an incredible preserved
specimen
from the early Cretaceous period, about
112 million years ago, found in what is
now Alberta, Canada. Amazing. Look at
this thing. So Borealopelta is one of
the ones where we've even got some of
the evidence of patterning, and it
suggests that it's darker on top and
lighter underneath. So this
illustration, I think that's Yeah,
that's Julius Csotonyi did that. He's a
Canadian paleo artist, and so that color
pattern is
roughly accurate. Oh wow, so this is
true to color. Yeah. So we can figure
out the colors. Give Give or take some
very large um uncertainties, it's going
to be something like this. That's so
awesome.
>> these guys are That's hard to eat that.
Near enough armored pine cones. Yeah,
though it's very much the adult
condition. Uh the juveniles seem to be
far less, if not unarmed.
>> We're back to the juveniles.
>> Right. So right. So So but that's why we
That armor is absolutely going to be
effective as
anti-predator, but it's probably evolved
primarily for combat and display between
members of the species. Cuz otherwise,
if this stopped you being eaten, the
babies would have it. This fossil is
considered one of the best preserved
dinosaur specimens ever found with
armor, skin, keratin sheaths, and even
stomach contents all intact. Incredible.
And so for that, he really did the work.
>> And also found miles and miles and miles
out to sea, or the the paleo sea. So
this is from a site which normally gives
us big marine reptiles.
Predatory plesiosaurs and ichthyosaurs
and then um
uh
mosasaurs and stuff like that, and then
it turned up an ankylosaur, well,
nodosaur in this case. Yeah, wow. This
is incredible.
>> Yeah. So okay, let's complete the
journey of Stan to the museum to like
you get you get to the process of
cleaning everything, stitching it all
together.
>> Yeah. Like Mark and like that suggested,
you know, this can be
even on an animal that size.
Borealopelta is, you know, 4-5 meters
long, we've only got to go up the front
2/3 of it. Yeah, this this can be like
needle level stuff. That's how you get
to the 30,000 hours.
>> Yeah, exactly that if it's that quality
and you want to get everything open. And
then something like Stan
actually really complicated skull. The
skull's full of lots of little bones.
The bones are really fragile, so that
just adds to the time. I mean, at least
the Ankylosaurus
the skull is just this giant solid block
of bone, which makes life a little bit
easier.
So, yeah, they're going to put those
hours in and that's really going to help
them
sell the animal, which is ultimately
what happened. I mean, Stan sat in the
Black Hills Institute for decades. I
mean, '87 and they sold it in like 2020.
So, they had it for
30 years
uh sitting in their kind of little
museum. And then my understanding was
basically the brothers broke the company
up and that's why they sold it. Yeah,
but it was still incredibly surprising
that it was sold for 31 million.
>> Yeah, I mean, far more than I think
anyone thought it was going to. I mean,
I I liken what you know, if you're not
buying like teeth or an ammonite in some
small fossil shop, you know, when you're
buying talking about things like whole
dinosaurs and whole Tyrannosaurus, I
think it's a bit like the art market in
it's worth what people will pay for it.
Yeah. And so, you know, Yeah.
plenty of T-Rexes had sold for a few
million dollars and therefore everyone
thought it would might be five.
You know, 10 would be an absurd sum of
money and then
Yeah.
It it went for 30 and it's like, okay,
well,
I was going to say someone wanted it
that bad, but clearly not two people
wanted it that bad cuz if only one guy
is prepared to bid 30, then it goes for
you know, a million more than the next
highest bidder. But presumably two
people, if not three, bid it to get that
high.
Yeah, it was anonymous at the time, but
now it's Abu Dhabi's Department of
Culture and Tourism came out and they
were the ones
>> got it. And
and then that record has been since
beaten apparently by a by Apex, the the
Stegosaurus, which I still haven't seen,
though a friend of mine has sent me some
photos of this thing. Is it impressive
to you this thing?
>> No, not especially. That's why I can't
imagine that it sold for that much. It's
a really nice Stegosaurus.
It's pretty big Stegosaurus.
Well preserved.
>> I've seen other very good Stegosaurus
and I don't understand why that's worth
that much more than something like Stan.
But it shows you the market. So, so
we're here in London, there's a
Stegosaurus called Sophie at the Natural
History Museum in London. Sophie is a
young animal, so she's not very big. I
mean, it's a sizeable specimen.
I'd say five-ish, 6 m off the top of my
head total length. But Sophie's like
truly exceptional. Like there's a couple
of plates missing, a handful of ribs, a
couple of bones in the tail, I think a
couple of toe bones. Like this is by far
the most complete Stegosaurus out there.
That sold for I think 250,000 pounds, so
maybe 400,000 dollars about a decade
ago.
So, this is now gone up like a
hundredfold
for an animal which is quite a bit
bigger,
but is way less complete.
So,
I for me those two things kind of
balance out because size is always
impressive and that's what the public
likes, but also a complete one is better
than a half a one or 2/3 of one.
So, yeah, so how has the price gone up a
hundred to or from
yeah, 400,000 to 40 million
in 10 years
for roughly the same thing? A T-Rex is a
little bit more epic than a Stegosaurus.
>> a massive premium on it because it's
yeah, a Stegosaurus is one of those top
tier, you know, it's
you can virtually do the list, you know,
T-Rex, Triceratops, Diplodocus,
Brontosaurus, Stegosaurus. It's in that
first six or seven, okay, these days
Velociraptor thanks to Jurassic Park,
but it's like it like but you know,
that's that's the list of like seven or
eight things that any random human
who doesn't care about dinosaurs and
doesn't know anything about dinosaurs,
but they've probably heard of them. You
know, Stegosaurus is in that list and
would have an idea of what it looked
like. Oh, yeah, it's got like the big
stuff stuck along the back. You know,
you you'd get that answer from almost
any, you know, 99% of people on the
street.
But yeah, it's it's not a T-Rex. So, how
it's worth yeah, 50% more
and it's not even a particularly
complete skeleton, Apex to my
understanding.
Like I I don't I don't get it.
Actually,
since we're on the topic of money, if I
gave you, let's say, 10 billion dollars,
how would you spend it? You were forced
I I forced you to spend it on
dinosaur-related things. How would you
spend it?
>> Um I mean, I'd probably drop half a
billion or so on the best museum you'd
ever seen So, put together a museum.
You're like one of the great
communicators, one of the great
scientists, and so like you would want
to push forward
the the whole field. And one of the ways
to do that is a great museum actually.
>> Yeah, but you wanted So, it's twofold
because
yeah, there's the communication and the
education part of it, which is something
I'm I'm massive on and I think
research is pointless if you don't
communicate it at some level. I'm not
saying everyone needs to communicate
everything. If you're working on the
nuances of a calculation of the volume
of a black hole or something, yeah,
probably doesn't need a press release or
a new museum exhibition. But
fundamentally, we should be talking
about our work. Um but also you've got
to store this stuff. Um many fossils are
fragile. They need to be kept not
necessarily in climate control, but at
least you want a basement that is much
more
even than, you know, just sticking it in
a box in a warehouse somewhere. So,
you've got to be able to store this
stuff to be able to study it or it's
kind of pointless. Um but with the rest
of that money, I'd buy a ton of land.
Like the
the, you know, quarries that gave us
Archaeopteryx in in Bavaria and have
given us a ton of other stuff. I've
worked on a load of pterosaurs, the
flying reptiles from there. These these
stuff are mostly
commercially run or just straight-up
privately owned and not being
commercially run. Someone's just
inherited it and it's just sitting on
this stuff. So, if somebody's building
stuff on land, is does that threaten
like the damage of
of the the the possibility of
discovering something on it? It's it's
more that they're not necessarily
exploiting it with fossils in mind.
Presume you have to balance the search
efforts and then the land by Yeah, but
you know, 1 billion on its own would go
a very, very long way, almost infinitely
if you're just creaming off the interest
and then funding excavations and
supporting scientists who are already
embedded in other museums or other
universities or other research
institutes. So, the rest is for buying
up land so that they those people can do
the Yeah, you you look at somewhere
like, you know, Brazil and there's I can
never remember the name of it, but
there's again one of these zones of
exceptional preservation where
superlative
pterosaurs, fish, we've had a handful of
dinosaurs and a whole bunch of other
stuff has come out. And it's just a
giant commercial mining operation.
And yeah, when they hit a fossil, when
they think they're close to it, yeah,
they stop and pull it out and
they'll send it to a museum and more
often they'll sell it to a museum and
museums only have so much money. Whereas
what if I owned that quarry?
And then I made sure everyone who worked
there was trained and got a bonus every
time they found anything. And then I
just handed everything they dug up
straight into a museum. So, there would
be some element of a crowd-sourced
paleontology, right? Yeah, but it's it's
more that like no researcher ever needs
to spend money to access that. No museum
needs to go and find a new donor to give
them half a million to go and buy this
one specimen knowing that it might still
go
yeah, to some Silicon Valley
billionaires' foyer or whatever. It's
like, well, I own the land, so it's
mine. So, problem solved. Like that
that's what's in my head. It just would
be wonderful to scale up the effort to
where we can map out the whole sort of
story of this time cuz it's such a
fascinating time in in in in the history
of Earth. I've jokingly written a couple
of times about how
all science funding in the world should
go to paleontology.
And the idea being that like, yeah, if
you want to investigate
black holes or neutrinos or
chemical crystallography or
panda genetics or whatever it is,
you can do that
anytime you want. Like that
that's not going to change a million
years from now as it will from tomorrow.
But fossils are in places that erode and
if we don't dig them up, they're gone.
So, we should dig all the fossils up now
and then we've got forever to study
them. But if we don't dig them up now,
who knows, you know, maybe there was
something twice the size of T-Rex and it
sat on a hillside for 6 months and then
the wind got to it and it's gone. And
that was the only one that ever
preserved.
Well, we'll never know now. To be clear,
this is a joke. I'm not suggesting we
should stop doing cancer research and
physics and other things, but but it is
we're we're in a fundamentally different
field where our science is literally
disappearing.
Yeah, and I mean, there's a I know it's
a joke, but there's some truth to it.
And
on the flip side, one of the things one
of the hopes is that technology will
somehow
ease the search and discovery process,
but as you said, so far most of it
>> I mean, Yeah, you know, Jurassic Park
'93, you've got that little scene where
they've got the
like thumper or something they call it
and it
it hits the ground and seismic and then
they go, "Look, look, here's the whole
skeleton." Yeah, they tried it. It it
doesn't really work.
Um we've tried looking for stuff with
drones.
That helps you getting into some
inaccessible areas, but until the
resolution's probably better, you still
got that problem of like looking, you
know, with human eyes which are
binocular and being able to, you know,
just tilt your head completely changes
how you see something in a way that
flying over
just just won't. Um I know they tried
looking So because the bones are porous,
they tend to suck things up. So actually
dinosaur bones can be really radioactive
if they're in areas
where there are
things like uranium. So yeah, that there
are drawers which have lead boxes around
them and stuff like this for dinosaur
bones or just signs saying do not
handle. They're very low-level
radioactive. Like you you'd have to like
stick it in your pocket for 6 months to
to run any real risk, but they're
radioactive much more so than the
background. So can we do that? Mm.
Turns out not really.
Um
So again, may maybe tech will advance,
but for now
Humans are quite incredible. Yeah, we
are, but also paleo's kind of bottom of
the
pile, you know, there's not many of us.
We don't have a lot of funding.
It takes real money to adapt stuff. So,
you know, like we're scanning stuff with
MRIs and things like that in hospitals,
but it mostly doesn't work very well
because the problem you've got is, like
I said, the bones take on some of the
properties of the minerals in which
they're embedded. Which means their
density is really similar. And things
like MRIs are or seismic activity is
basically looking for differences in
density. Well, if it's the same density
as the you know, it's like I put some
green plasticine in some blue
plasticine. There's going to be a bit of
a join and they're going to be very very
slightly different.
But ultimately, you're not going to be
able to detect that through most means
if you're looking for density or mass or
anything like that. Well, I personally
think that there's few things as
important to understand as the history
of life on Earth.
There's like books, right? There's like
a or maybe you can think of it as
chapters and then one of the chapters is
the time of the dinosaurs. And then
there's a great extinction.
>> that's that's not a million miles off to
I think Darwin had an analogy like that
of we've we've we've got a few words on
a few pages
spread out, but between them you get an
idea of
what the story is and where it's going.
I think what humans don't quite realize
is we may end up being just a chapter in
a book. It might be our extinction event
self-created. Perhaps a nuclear war,
perhaps robots take over, perhaps we
don't know. Well, or or or dumb luck. I
mean the dinosaurs were doing absolutely
fine until a dirty great rock hit them
and you you can't
you know, Ben Affleck and Bruce Willis
movies aside, there's only so much you
can do about that.
>> take that back. There's nothing they can
do wrong.
All right. Uh quick pause, bathroom
break. Yeah, yeah, yeah.
We've taken a few tangents, but let's
uh
continue on the thread of T-Rex. Yeah.
Go go to the skull. Yeah. So uh the
skull of T-Rex is iconic. You describe
it as being incredibly robust and
overbuilt. Yeah, there's a lot of bone
on there. As I said, we mentioned a
couple of other things like
Giganotosaurus is, you know, giant
carnivore. Uh if you put Giganotosaurus
T-Rex in
That's the one. So that's the Yeah,
that's on my old blog. It's not my
image. Um what are we looking at on the
left and the right?
>> T-Rex on the left in orange and
Giganotosaurus on the right in red. As I
said, they're pretty similarly sized,
but just look at the robusticity. Like
the front of the snout of T-Rex is all
bone. And yet the major opening is this
thing called the antorbital fenestra,
the opening in front of the orbit, is
absolutely massive in Giganotosaurus.
It's like half the skull. The opening at
the back of the skull is much bigger.
The opening in the lower jaw is much
bigger. And actually the jaw, what you
can't see is side to side is much
thinner. So their heads are the same
size and as animals they are about the
same linear dimensions. But you can just
see there's just way more bone
in the T-Rex.
>> It's incredible.
>> This is like it's not overbuilt. It's
obviously it's evolved that this is the
right amount of bone for the stresses
and strains for what it's doing and how
it's acting. But you compare it to
anything that's not a very large
Tyrannosaur
and suddenly you see just how much bone
has gone into it. It is a very large
it's an absolutely large head, but it's
a very heavy head with a lot of bone.
And a lot of that bone is there to
resist all the forces of all the muscles
because it has this giant super powerful
bite, which again you can see in the
teeth. So the bone and the muscles kind
of evolved together. They get bigger and
bigger and bigger and bigger. So you
need this kind of structure for the
power that crush has. So one of the big
things Tyrannosaurs have, and this goes
all the way down to the the earliest
Tyrannosaurs were like our size. Like
little diddy things like 2 3 m long, be
a meter and a half tall.
But they have fused nasals. So the pair
of bones that in us there's not a lot
there, but I've seen something like a
dog or something like a baboon with a
long nose, like the whole top of the
snout.
And there's two, one each side. In
Tyrannosaurs they fuse together. So they
form a solid bit of bone. So the whole
top of the nose is solid. And then that
makes the skull just fundamentally more
rigid, enabled to take more power
through it. The very early ones weren't
super biters, I suspect, but they do
also but they do have the little
flattened teeth at the front. So I
strongly suspect the fused nasals at
least originally is for resisting that
cuz again, if you've got a long nose and
you're pulling with quite a lot of force
at the very tip, that's going to bend
your snout. So strengthen that.
Can you speak to the evolution from the
smaller to the bigger of the T-Rex? What
What were some of the evolutionary
pressures? What like what what's the
story of the evolution?
>> So Tyrannosaurs go back to the middle
Jurassic. So Tyrannosaurs were around
for 100 million years. So from about
160-ish 165-ish million years till the
extinction
66.5 I think is the current dating on
that. So yeah, you got 100 million years
of them. And the middle Jurassic
annoyingly is probably the bit of the
Mesozoic, so the whole dinosaur period,
that we know the least of. Just by
chance we just don't have many rocks
exposed of the right age that
are fossil bearing.
Um but we got two or three Tyrannosaurs
from that time. And yeah, they're
they're really quite diddy. Yeah, they'd
be chest high to us.
Two or three meters long including the
tail, probably more like three a lot of
them.
Um little heads.
Long arms. They they look like every
other carnivore going. There's there's
not a lot special to them. Um at this
point. They've only just separated from
their nearest groups, which is actually
something like the ancestors of
Giganotosaurus actually. Um
They do have the fused nasals early on.
They do have these special little teeth
at the front of the jaw very early on.
They're feathered early on. Definitively
we have
skeletons with feathers on them that are
early Tyrannosaurs.
Uh at least until the early Cretaceous.
Um
But yeah, they're knocking around as
relatively small animals in Europe and
Asia. We have a couple from the UK.
Uh we have a whole bunch from China.
There's stuff from like Kyrgyzstan and
places like this. I think there's one a
relatively early one from Russia.
Um
And then when they get into the early
Cretaceous, they start getting quite a
bit bigger. Uh so something like
Yutyrannus if you want to There you go.
So Yutyrannus is fuzzy. Um we have three
specimens definitively feathered. Um It
gets to 6 7 m long.
There's something funny looking about
the sexy smaller earlier version of the
T-Rex.
>> But but again, this is 7 8 m, maybe
weighs half a ton or a ton. Like we we
are very much on the menu for an animal
that size. That is massive and
dangerous.
Quite what triggered them, there's
general patterns in evolution of size
change and one famous one called Cope's
rule I've worked on a fair bit, which is
the idea that over time things tend to
get bigger. And they do for various
different reasons.
One of which is just pure almost like
diffusion. If you start small and you
evolve,
well, you can't get much smaller, but
you can always get bigger. So you you
naturally kind of diffuse away.
Whereas if you're a blue whale, you
probably can't get much bigger and its
descendants will probably end up being
smaller. But there are reasons that
bigger things do better. You can hunt
more stuff. You're more energy
efficient. You can move more
efficiently.
Um you're dominant in contest
particularly with conspecifics. If
you're trying to win a territory or win
mating rights,
bigger things usually beat up smaller
things. So there's going to be selection
favoring them.
Um but then big things don't usually do
well in extinction events. So that tends
to reset the clock by killing off the
big stuff and then smaller stuff does
better again.
>> So mostly there's evolutionary
advantages. But but a fairly big one. So
yeah, it's the it's the classic thing of
there's a day-to-day advantage of being
bigger and that might last for a few
million years right up to the point that
suddenly there's the biggest drought the
Earth has encountered in 5 million years
and then all the big stuff just gets
nailed.
>> Also we should probably say, is this
accurate to say that the bigger you get
the fewer of you
There are. Yeah, there's there's just
less fundamental space, you know,
there's more mice than there are
elephants. There are more elephants than
there are whales. Like there's only so
much biomass that an ecosystem can
support.
>> And bigger things are just worse at
repopulating in extinction events, for
example.
>> that So they're less likely to survive
because they need more fuel. You know,
what would feed a mouse for a year won't
feed an elephant for a week. So if And
And of course the mice are going to have
an easier time finding a few little
seeds than an elephant's going to find
tons of food. And then they've got less
genetic diversity. There might be 5,000
mice, there might be 200 elephants. So
who's likely to have more genes or who's
likely to have selection acting on those
genes to produce a survivor?
Well, the one with five or 10 or a
thousand times the population. And then
yeah, on top of that, you've then got
the very slow reproductive cycle, which
then again gives evolution not a lot to
work with. If as an elephant you're
breeding once every 5 years and as a
mouse you're doing it once every 8
weeks. What can we say about the the
evolution of just the the massive
bone-crushing
power of
>> So so that starts kicking in seriously
kind of Tyrannosaur size and up. So
that's when you start getting they're
not just bigger animals that are getting
to comparable size to the other big
dinosaur carnivores of the time, you
start getting those bigger heads.
But even then, relatively late in
Tyrannosaur evolution, so getting into
kind of the middle part of the late
Cretaceous,
you you see a split and we have a group
called the Alioramins,
um which have really, really long, thin
skulls and they look much more like a
kind of Is it Velociraptor? They look
much more like a giant Velociraptor
ish
than a Tyrannosaur. Still relatively
small arms, um
but it's a it's a very long snout and so
this is a fast-biting animal with a
relatively light bite. So it's probably
taking really quite small stuff
proportionally. And then the other side,
you've got the Tyrannosaurines,
which are the really big-headed ones and
so that is few ancestral things like
Albertosaurus and Gorgosaurus, um from
both from Alberta, um but then
Daspletosaurus, a thing I named called
Zhuchengtyrannus in China,
and then Tarbosaurus and Tyrannosaurus.
And you've really only got three or four
of these ultra giants, which are all
kind of 10 m plus in size, and then have
the really broad skull with the real
kind of excessive bite force. But even
things like Albertosaurus,
which is I mean a big animal, 7 7 8 m,
yeah, a ton or so, they're not quite
T-Rex, but they're definitely more
robust than
the other contemporaneous carnivores. So
there is this progression of
getting bigger, getting a bigger head,
the teeth get bigger, but there's fewer
of them,
building up the bone-biting and the and
the power.
Um but with some interesting
evolutionary offshoots in the way that
yeah, cats are largely much of a
muchness, but then you get things like
bobcats and lynx, which are actually
quite bulky, stocky little cats that
don't have the long tail and are doing
something quite different. Can you just
speak almost more generally because um
T-Rex is sort of one of the great apex
predators of history of Earth. How does
a apex predator evolve? Like what Why
did T-Rex win? Why Why isn't everybody
Why isn't there like a vicious race to
the top and
I have a problem with the term apex
predator because um
ecologically, apex predators are
generally defined as things that eat
other predators.
So a great white shark is because it's
eating stuff like tuna and sea lions,
which are themselves predators. So it's
a predator of predators. Whereas
people people love saying lions are apex
predators and they love saying T-Rex is
an apex predator.
They're eating herbivores. This is not
some
This is not some weird and unusual
thing. They're the largest predator in
their ecosystem.
Uh and they are a giant one. My friend
Darren Naish has moved to using the word
arch predator. So it's like some kind of
massive thing, but avoiding the term
apex because I think that leads into a
It it it It's a subtle terminology
thing, but like
>> Uh an important one. I just learned
something today. So I didn't understand
I thought I was I was using the the word
apex predator as basically
>> everyone keeps using it when I don't
think they should. And And now you're
getting into linguistics and it's like,
well, if everyone uses it to mean that,
does it now mean that rather than what
it should mean? And then I'm probably
losing that argument because actually
you'll probably find way more stuff
calling it an apex predator than you
will an arch predator. But But here we
are. Arch predator, beautiful. I I
learned something today. But with that
you're saying T-Rex didn't eat other
predators?
>> Well, it's it's probably not going to.
So we can get into, though I'd prefer
not to cuz it's tedious, the argument of
whether or not there's these small
things which some people have said is a
different group called Nanotyrannus or a
different species called Nanotyrannus.
But fundamentally,
T-Rex is definitely weird, even compared
to all the other giant Tyrannosaurs that
are very closely related to it,
because it is by far, ludicrously by
far, the largest carnivore in its
ecosystem.
So So it doesn't really have competition
actually. I mean, so so this is a
Velociraptor skull. Um There are There
are There are some carnivores that are a
bit bigger than this,
>> Yeah. but not enormously so,
um which were knocking around as T-Rex.
The The skull's the same time
tooth crap. Right, but but like you
think about that. Yeah. And that's like
going
go That's like going to Africa and
going, "Okay, there are lions. What's
the next biggest predator?" And it's
like, "Well, there's a weasel about this
big." Yeah. Like it it's that kind of
size difference.
And you don't get that normally in
ecosystems. So it didn't have some of
the other big dinosaurs around it? Not
carnivores.
There's huge herbivores, but there's no
huge carnivores around.
>> see. It would It would eat those the
juvenile of the herbivore, but
>> it's going to be eating Triceratops and
Edmontosaurus and Parasaurolophus.
There's even a couple of giant sauropods
knocking around in some places. It's
It's going to be hoovering them up. But
like how often is it going to eat
Again, Velociraptor isn't there, but how
often is it going to eat something the
size of an adult Velociraptor? I mean,
they're a fraction of our size and we're
probably too small. That That This is
like lions hunting mice. Like you're
just not going to unless one like
virtually runs into your mouth, you're
not going to go and try and eat it. So
the question still stands about arch
uh predators then. Like how does it How
do How do you win?
Yeah, well, I mean
So I mean that there's there's no real
winners. There's just, you know,
turnover cuz ultimately the birds, you
know, it it it it still lost out when
when things went wrong. And as we're
just talking about, you know, things do
tend to lose out when they're big.
They're just so much more vulnerable to
extinction. Um but clearly, dinosaurian
ecosystems
had much bigger herbivores and therefore
by extent much bigger carnivores
than any system we've seen before or
after. Um even in relatively sparse ones
like bits of the late Triassic when the
dinosaurs are really just getting going
or the very early Jurassic, but you've
still got some like multi-ton herbivores
and then you've got some multiple
hundred kilo predators. So about as big
as elephants and lions get today.
And then once you're in the Jurassic and
Cretaceous, it is entirely normal to
have
multiple species that are 10 20 30 tons
plus as herbivores and anything up to 5
tons as a carnivore. I mean,
T-Rex is probably the biggest of them,
but
carnivores that exceed
fully terrestrial carnivores that exceed
a ton,
there's dozens of species of dinosaurs.
Is it interesting to you that no other
carnivore predator
was able to develop in that environment
over millions of years? I mean, they
probably just ecologically dominant in
the way that mammals are now, you know.
Crocs get bigger than lions and tigers,
but they're fundamentally tied to the
water, but you don't see crocs
roaming the Serengeti or anything like
that. Um but yeah, big I mean, the
really big crocs even now get to over a
ton. So those are very serious animals
and I think big polar bears
are in the like 500 kilo range. Though
again, they hunt a lot of stuff in water
and then things like grizzlies are at
least
partially herbivorous or omnivorous. So
there was a very large marine reptile,
Mosasaurus. Did T-Rex ever come across
that? In theory at least, the really
giant Mosasaurs are much bigger in the
same way that unsurprisingly whales are
much bigger than terrestrial carnivores
now.
Um
Jurassic Park unsurprisingly has rather
exaggerated it. So the one from Is it
Jurassic World?
It's like twice the size it should be.
But some of these things were still
like, you know, 15 20 m. But yeah, some
of them are absolutely giant. We We had
one dug up in the UK just a couple of
years ago and I got to see
the skull of it or a cast of the skull.
And yeah, it's about the same size as a
T-Rex skull. If we take a ridiculous
detour before we get back to science,
what creature in the history of Earth
would challenge a T-Rex in a fight,
would you say? On land.
>> On land. I mean, nothing reasonably.
Like the the the really big ones are
going to be
The The only other thing you can really
add is the I said this might be a very
British adage of it's not the size of
the dog in the fight, it's the size of
the fight in the dog.
Um so yeah, maybe there's something a
bit smaller, which is just
hyper-aggressive and that would be
enough to win like the the classic honey
badger chasing off lions. It's not that
a honey badger would win in a fight, but
if the honey badger is prepared to put
up that much of a fight and the lion
really doesn't want to get hurt, then
then he kind of technically wins. You
can't imagine like like any of the cats
can't like tigers and none of them can
do I mean, the size difference, the
power of the jaw, all that kind of
stuff. Yeah, but going to T-Rex, like
what could reasonably challenge it?
There's a couple of other giant
Tyrannosaurs. There's a couple of giant
Carcharodontosaurs from South America
that are
are comparable in linear measurements,
but are probably rather smaller and
rather lighter, in which case, your
money's going to be on the bigger guy
with the bigger bite.
And that simply is T-Rex. Yeah, the bite
is important. Yeah, I think it is
because yeah, these these guys
the Carcharodontosaurs, they're they're
much more cutting
and they're really killing stuff
probably by grappling with the arms cuz
they do have big muscular arms with big
claws and then slashing away at stuff.
So, I think they're probably doing
something more like almost like wolves
or hyena or hunting dog where they're
harrying stuff
and slashing at it and you're basically
bleeding them out
and wearing them down. So, what about
that strategy? So, maybe you could speak
to biting strategy. So, a T-Rex
is a I guess a relatively slow bite but
extremely powerful. What about animals
that have very fast bites? So, it's very
simple mechanics, you know, if you have
a very long jaw, you're going to close
faster but with less power at the tip
than if you have a really short one
that's deep. And so, that really is it.
Um but yeah, as I say, there's there's
things like the Aliormus and then
there's things like yeah, Velociraptor
and a lot of its relatives. Really very
small and not just small but you know,
narrow. It is narrow snouted. There's
not going to be a lot of fundamental
strength here. The teeth very numerous,
very small. Um so, they're much more
about grabbing something tiny, you know.
Velociraptor's eating rat-sized stuff.
That's going to be probably its primary
diet.
So, what if there's a bunch of smaller
fast-biting things that could just bleed
a T-Rex to death?
They're going to struggle though.
Um I I remember doing some work for one
documentary and they yeah, they
literally wanted Velociraptor fighting a
T-Rex. And I said like, you you do know
this is like we're we're going to shoot
some meerkats killing a lion. And it's
like, well, you can film it but no one
would believe it because you know, these
ankle-high things trying to like savage
a shinbone. Oh, yeah, I'm sure they'll
make some holes and it'll lose some
blood and it may not be very happy but
it's
I don't think they're going to win. The
size of Velociraptor was exaggerated by
Jurassic Oh, enormously. I mean, they
get a bit bigger than this in terms of
the skull. But yeah, they're they're
kind of thigh-high
to me. Like a meter or so to the top of
the head, 2 m long.
Whereas in the movies, they're like
standing taller than guys who are 6 ft.
So, it's just
massively massively scaled up and then
these kind of big kind of domey heads
and they're not the really
long narrow snout. Maybe we could take
that tangent. What does Jurassic Park
and Jurassic World franchise get right
and wrong? I mean, get wrong a hell of a
lot. What what are some of like really
definitive things to you that are
interesting that it gets wrong? And
also, what are the things it it it gets
pretty close to right?
>> Um I mean, I I just want to preface my
answer cuz I always I always get asked
about this understandably and it's like
I I get that it's a movie but if
someone's going to ask me what does it
get wrong, I'm going to give them an
answer. But I get get people going, "Oh,
you're just nipping. Oh, you know, it's
fiction. Oh, you know, it's made up."
Yeah, I do know but someone asked the
question. So, here's the answer. I
should say that some of the things I've
heard you describe, I feel like it's the
responsibility of those folks to get it
right. I I think there's there's
something
I really deeply admire. There's a show
called Chernobyl. Um It's like they
don't need to be that accurate but they
really it's like the detail of the the
kitchenware
Yeah.
>> in a room. Like just to get the tiniest
detail right, who's that for? I don't
know who's that for but that's for the
that's great art. Yeah.
>> that's the spirit of the thing. And like
that if you
focus on getting those tiny details
right, there's some magical thing
happens about the bigger story. If you
don't care
about the details,
the story gets corrupted. So, I I just
want to say that some of the things you
describe like how many fingers
it's like that's important to get that
right cuz if you do, some magical stuff
can really emerge and it could become a
legendary film as opposed to just a
Yeah, I mean, summer hit. That's my
take. Again, I you know, I've I've
worked on documentaries where they're
claiming that accuracy is absolutely
critical and 100% important and they
won't put anything on screen that I
haven't told them to and
then many of those things turn out not
to be quite as true as advertised once
you get round to it. So, I'm I'm aware
that
when even documentaries will take
massive liberties
you can't be too harsh on
what is popular fiction.
Um on the other hand, I am also aware
that it is
by far by a ludicrous degree the most
popular bit of any kind of media that
includes my work as it were or something
that I'm actively engaged in and know
about. And so, whether or not it should
have that influence for whether or not
the filmmakers should have
responsibility, it does. It does have
that knock-on.
Um so, I mean, it's simple as stuff as
T-Rex can't see if you can't move. Yeah,
it could. I don't know where that came
from. As far as I can tell, Crichton
just dreamed it up.
In in The Lost World, his sequel book,
he hints that there's a research paper
that says it and that's kind of where he
got it from. Um there's a second
paleontologist character
who's advising Dodgson, the evil InGen
guy. And he says, "Oh, no, that's from
such and such's research." And like, I
tried looking up. As far as I can tell,
it doesn't exist and never did. Um so, I
think it's just straight fiction. And
it's like it works for the
it works for the book and it works for
the movie but it's as far as I can tell,
it's straight fiction and Crichton just
made it up. If it's buried in some bit
of literature, he's done better finding
it than I have and I've had a really
good look and I know how to look. And
I've never come across anyone who's
found it either. Um
but it does it just like warps the
perception, you know, Velociraptor
cheetah speed, pack hunters, super
intelligent giant-sized animals and
okay, 1993 it's a bit more forgivable
but even then we were pretty confident
they had feathers. Is any of that true?
Wait, so uh Probably not.
The the the the pack hunter aspect? Um
so, that's something I've written quite
a lot about. Um
the evidence for pack hunting in any
dinosaur at all
is almost nonexistent.
Um it it basically doesn't exist. And
that's going exactly back to again that
stuff we talk about bite marks and
taphonomy and like the history of
specimens and and how you interpret it.
So, what kind of evidence would show
like maybe bite marks from multiple
sources?
>> so it's really really tough. So, the the
main one which was put forward is
there's this famous um association in
Montana of Deinonychus which is often
confused with Velociraptor including in
the books and movie. Um basically a
bigger version of this that's rather
older from the um early Cretaceous. And
I think it's Tenontosaurus which is kind
of Iguanodontin so, Iguanodon with the
spiky thumbs.
Basically otherwise a fairly
run-of-the-mill herbivore.
And there are two sites I believe for
this but there's one that's much more
important where you have
a Tenontosaurus carcass
with Deinonychus carcasses. And so, the
interpretation of this is, well, this is
a group that brought down the herbivore.
And of course, the immediate kind of
counterargument to that is
well, why did they all die there?
Like when you know, when lions kill a
wildebeest, they eat it. They don't all
just die next to it. Yeah. Or even if
they did kill it and start eating it and
then like if they got into a fight and
killed each other, well, lions as a
species are not going to hang around for
very long if every time they kill
something they get into a mortal fight
and kill half the pride. Um
there's nothing obvious that killed
them.
Um but it's at least possible that this
was something like a predator trap. So,
predator traps are really neat. So, the
La Brea Tar Pits is a classic example.
The idea is
a herbivore stumbles into something like
tar. You've got your deer or wildebeest
or mammoth or whatever it is
waist-deep in tar and going, "Mmm, I'm
dying. I'm dying." and making horrible
noises. And you know, Smilodon walks
over and goes, "Great." and wades out
after it
and he's now stuck.
And then the next one and then the next
one and the next one and the next one
and then lo and behold, you now have
something like La Brea where they've got
like the the numbers are something
absurd like
I think they've got like three mammoths
and one ground sloth and then it's like
100 dire wolves and 40 Smilodon because
it's just sucking the carnivores in.
Wow.
>> And you get these really distorted
ratios.
I don't think that's the case with the
Deinonychus-Tenontosaurus stuff because
there's ways that you can probably rule
that out but there are probably places
like this where it's happened. Again,
the other one is um the toxin one who's
near Cleveland Lloyd so, it's just
coming up on your screen. That's another
one
um with loads of dinosaurs there's
Allosaurus.
Um but we've definitely seen it with
I think it I think this has come up with
something like lions or wolves.
Like they found loads of them dead uh by
a lake and it turned out or this pond.
And this pond had got some really sort
of nasty algal bloom toxin in it. And
the interpretation was the same kind of
thing is that like a couple of deer were
drinking this stuff's toxic and kills
you within minutes, keels over, dies.
Wolf smells dead meat, comes over,
starts eating it, has a drink, keels
over and dies.
And then it's it's not getting you're
just dying from the toxicity rather than
being like
physically sucked in and trapped but the
same effect can happen. And so, you just
end up with a pile of dead bodies. So,
I'm pulling up some stuff here. First
off, shout out to Perplexity, super
awesome.
Uh there it'd be great if you fact-check
some of this stuff. So,
fossil discoveries including parallel
trackways and bone beds containing
multiple Tyrannosaurus suggest these
large predators sometimes moved and
possibly hunted in groups. You as a
person who wrote a book about the
behavior of dinosaurs.
>> Yep, let me deconstruct that like almost
instantly. So, it's it's cuz it's really
easy cuz this this is my my book on
dinosaur behavior. This is just the kind
of thing I'm talking about. So, the the
Tyrannosaur trackways of a group of
Tyrannosaurs is, I think, four or five
tracks total.
So, it's like two from one animal, two
from a second animal, and one from a
third animal. That's not the end of the
world. That's somehow how
trackways form. Like, you you know, the
rock's broken up, they stood on mud, and
then they didn't, whatever. Just to
clarify, trackways means footprints of
multiple, maybe steps? Yeah, one of them
has got a left and right. And the other
two don't. It's it's very fragmentary,
but I I haven't that that's not a
problem with the interpretation. The
problem is this is interpreted as a
group of them moving together.
Well, why?
Because they're going in roughly the
same direction. Okay, and they're
roughly equal sizes.
Okay.
But,
like, I've seen solitary animals moving
in groups. Um a guy I know quite well in
South Africa I go to South Africa
regularly for my teaching, actually. Um
and he's one of the big guys at South
African National Parks, and he gives me
the skinny on all kinds of weird stuff.
And he told me a few years ago that one
of his park rangers had observed
leopards hunting together in a group.
Now, leopards are basically not just
solitary, they're like antisocial. Like,
they beat the hell out of each other if
they come near each other.
But, I've also seen, you know, you you
get game trails are a thing, paths that
single animals take.
If a female is in heat, like, males will
track her down and follow her.
So, you'll get one set of footprints,
and then a couple of hours later a male
will come past, and a couple of hours
later another male will come past. And
now you've got three sets of footprints
all traveling in the same direction on
the same bit of path. But, they live on
their own.
Let alone
hunting together, which is a massive
step above this.
And then the one I've talked about quite
a bit in my book is spotted hyena,
Crocuta crocuta, which is the one
There's a whole bunch of hyenas, but
this is the one everyone knows. They're
the big laughing hyena.
And can see plenty of Attenborough-type
documentaries of them
seven or eight of them, or even 10 or 12
of them, going into a herd and ripping
apart wildebeest or zebra, whatever it
is.
But, actually, if you read the
scientific literature, this is really
rare. They mostly hunt on their own.
Now, they do live in these social clans
with hierarchies and complex social
interactions. They're very social
animals.
But, they mostly hunt on their own.
So,
even if you find loads of trackways of
them moving together, or as again,
there's one if not two for Tyrannosaurs
where we've got multiple Tyrannosaurs
together, and that's been argued for
pack hunting. At best, that argues they
might have lived together.
But, it doesn't tell you whether or not
they hunted together.
So, how can we make a decision on one
way or the other? So, I I mean, I I tend
to be ultra-conservative in this
context, and I think we should probably
avoid saying things that we're not quite
confident about. I I don't want to ever
go down the we must have really
definitive 100% convincing evidence cuz
this is paleontology, and we don't have
that kind of data. But,
just as I talked about with things like
the predator-prey size ratio stuff,
there is data we can start to use on
living species about what tends to
trigger
hunting in groups or living in groups,
and what data there might be from stuff
like brain sizes or other trackways, or
again, we do have bite marks indicating
prey size. If you start finding repeated
attacks on big prey
from relatively small predators, that
would be quite convincing. Um as you
said, maybe we had bite marks of
multiple different sizes.
Now, that on its own, um it comes hard
cuz obviously scavenging,
um
you know,
Tyrannosaurs are an exception. Most
dinosaurs most carnivorous dinosaurs
have pretty similarly-shaped teeth. So,
how easy is it to tell
an adult from a juvenile from an adult
from a different species that's just a
bit smaller? Probably pretty tricky.
I mean, for me, I think the
the kind of gold standard, which I don't
think we're ever going to find, but you
never know, like, you could in theory
get a trackway of something like a
herbivore
with a whole bunch of carnivore tracks
coming
by it. We do have a couple like this,
but they don't have what I'd really want
to see, which is if you trace the
footprints of the individual carnivores,
and if A's in early on A's footprint go
on top of B's, but later on B's go on
top of A's, they must have been there at
the same time. Cuz there's no way they
could have been even minutes or hours
apart. So, if you had that, then those
two must be together, or at least within
sight of each other, and one's not
turning around and roaring or having a
fight. If you can do that with seven or
eight all converging on one herbivore,
and then everything goes manic,
well, that's really pretty convincing.
It is so fascinating and awesome, but
like the Sherlock Holmes aspect of
paleontology, like figuring out cuz you
have very little signal, and you have to
figure out the puzzle of it from that.
And like that's such a brilliant you're
giving so many brilliant examples of
like, yeah, if A steps on top of B, and
then B steps on top of A, that's a
strong signal that they were walking
together. I am a bit of a Sherlock
Holmes fan, and he references Cuvier.
So, Cuvier is this legendary French
anatomist, uh Baron Cuvier. Uh he was
the first guy to posit that things went
extinct working on mammoths. And he
said, well, there's nothing like this
alive today, so extinction happens.
Which before that, we didn't really
know. And Holmes has a line about
just as Cuvier can restore an animal
from the smallest bone, so I can restore
the events from the smallest detail. I'm
I'm paraphrasing, but I'm not far off.
>> Yeah, that's true to that.
>> used an analogy that Conan Doyle
specifically used for Holmes going back
to paleontology.
>> I mean, it's obvious, it's clear. It's
right there, yeah. That that's how on
the nose you are with that one. So,
okay. So, basically, you clarified and
showed all the things in Jurassic
Yeah, we we yeah, we we got off topic
before we even got onto Jurassic Park.
>> And just Velociraptor, you said that the
you know, the yeah, the size, the pack
hunting, all of that. The pack hunting,
just to round off on that, like, I don't
know. Maybe. Um there's actually been
some more recent stuff on Deinonychus
looking at
things like isotopes in the teeth and
feeding traces and some other stuff
that's hinting that maybe there is more
going on there.
Um which is great. I'm I'm not anti the
idea that this exists, but you you
absolutely get this build-up of the idea
that Velociraptor is a pack hunter comes
from Deinonychus. And I think the
evidence for Deinonychus is really weak
in exactly the way that, okay, lions are
group hunters. We know they are. Does
that mean that leopards are
and tigers and puma? No. So, why on
earth do you think that just because
even if Deinonychus is,
that doesn't really tell you anything
about Velociraptor.
Um group hunting has all kinds of more
complicated dynamics going on it than
just close relatives tend to do it. You
can flip that around, you know.
African hunting dog, wolves, um things
like bush dogs, there's various canids
that all hunt in groups. But, then
you've got things like maned wolves,
which are effectively solitary. Um the
hyenas, spotted hyena are yeah, these
super social animals, but the brown
hyena, the striped hyena, and the
aardwolf are solitary. So, you you just
can't do
group versus solitary off
close relatives or anything like that. I
am very sure
a ton of dinosaurs were
aggregates, lived in groups to some
degree, and I'm very sure some of them
were social with complex lives and
hierarchies, and even pack hunting.
Which ones?
I have very little idea because I think
the data is so sparse
that we can't really say it with any
confidence for anything, in my opinion.
I think that can be got at. I think we
need to start getting at it with the
sort of stuff that I'm talking about,
like get a better understanding of what
drives sociality in lions versus tigers
versus leopards, you know. Relatively
close relatives who overlapped, don't
forget in India, leopards and tigers
overlap with lions. Yeah, the Asiatic
lion is still there. Um
so, you can talk about ecosystem
structure and prey size and prey type
and all this stuff. We can
maybe maybe we can start piecing that
together a bit better.
And then apply that to stuff like the
trackways and the isotopes and all the
rest of it, um bite marks and these mass
mortality sites. So, I think it can be
done,
but personally, like, what were pack
hunters? No idea.
I don't think I don't think any of them
were in the sense that I don't think
we've got good evidence for any of them.
But, there probably exists on Earth
definitive evidence one way or the
other. Yeah, probably for some of them.
I mean, it's I think it's well within
the scope. One of the papers writing
about this, ironically arguing against
pack hunting in Deinonychus,
um said that, well, it's probably not
the case because you don't really see
pack hunting in birds. And so, if you
don't see it in birds, then dinosaurs
being their ancestor with birds can't
evolve it, then maybe dinosaurs couldn't
have evolved it. Which
I'm not sure is a great logical argument
because of the complexities of social
behavior anyway. But, then there are a
couple of birds which actively hunt in
groups. Uh things like the giant ground
hornbills, um Ethiopia and South Africa
are really good example of that. So, so
that point is incorrect. And then we see
if not true sociality, we see
cooperation in crocodilians, and we're
seeing degrees of social behavior in
things like iguanas. So, the idea that
like well, birds are super advanced and
dinosaurs can't do it cuz the stupid
reptiles are too stupid and therefore
dinosaurs are more like them, which
isn't quite what they're saying, but
it's sort of the unwritten idea, well,
we have social behavior and cooperation
behavior
in crocs and in lizards. So, that really
gives you the impression that dinosaurs,
theoretically at least, are perfectly
capable of that. So, there's pack
hunting, but there's also sociality,
which is such an interesting idea. It's
How did they live? And this is something
you look at that paleontology doesn't
often touch. It's like the lives. Yeah,
because because, you know, animals are
doing complicated things. So, you know,
in the case of lions, a large part of
this is down to territoriality and the
the males ultimately are defending the
territory, and that's effectively
protecting the females, but of course
what they're mostly protecting them from
is other males. So, there's a ludicrous
bit of self-interest. Um but that's
effectively how it's operating as a
system, but it could just be
predatory type. Cheetahs are my go-to
example for this. So, cheetahs are the
weird ones compared to the other cats
because females are solitary, but males
are social. So, brothers will when when,
you know, if the female has five or six
cubs, the brothers will stay together in
a group and then the girls will go off
on their own.
And if you're a if you're the only
brother or the only survivor, you will
usually hook up hook up with a gang of
other males. So, cheetahs are pack
hunters if you're male and a solitary
hunter if you're female.
So, it's not about territory defense or
occupation for them. It's about prey
type. Is it possible to know the sex of
a T-Rex or any of the other dinosaurs?
Like what what can paleontology show us?
So, in theory, yes. In practice, it's
way more complicated. So, unless you get
very lucky, we have a handful of
specimens that still have eggs inside
them. Instant giveaway.
Um but that's is like two or three.
Um
what you can look for is both reptiles
and birds have a thing called medullary
bone. And when you're laying eggs and
you need a lot of calcium very quickly
cuz it's
that eggshell goes on basically like
kind of like the last minute during egg
development. So, you need a lot of
calcium very quickly. So, during the
laying season, these animals grow this
really weird kind of bone texture on big
things like the femur and the humerus,
like really big bones in the body.
And that's it's got a weird texture cuz
it's full of blood vessels. And it's
full of blood vessels so that you can
basically apply a lot of blood supply to
it quickly, suck up some of the calcium
from that bone, take it through the
system, put it on the eggs, lay your
eggs.
We can find that.
So, if you have a dinosaur bone and it's
the right kind of thing, so you can't do
it on like a finger or a claw or a bit
of rib, but nice big bone, you could cut
a chunk of that out,
grind it down to the point that it's
virtually transparent, fraction of a
millimeter thick, put it under a
microscope and have a look. And if you
see the right bone texture,
that's There There's some exceptions,
but that's very probably medullary bone
and you have yourself a female.
So, the instant assumption is, "Okay, so
you can tell female from male." No, we
can tell laying female from everything
else. So, males won't have medullary
bone. Young females won't have them.
Females outside of the breeding season
won't have it. Females inside the
breeding season, but maybe they've been
really sick this year, don't have it or
they laid their eggs early and now they
don't need it anymore, won't have it.
So, occasionally,
if you cut up a bone, which of course we
try not do that much, you can get the
signal of medullary bone and infer that
you have a female in the breeding
season. But so, there's no like large
bone structure differences. Well, maybe
there is, but we haven't seen it. You
look at things like
um
kudu uh
um blackbuck and all kinds of antelope
or even most deer, and the males have
horns or antlers and the females don't.
And then you look at something like
Triceratops and all the ceratopsians,
it's a big clade of uh must be 40
species by now.
And every single one of them has the
frill and has some kind of horn
somewhere. You don't have the hornless
ones or the frillless ones in the way
that we do with
a lot of these.
I'm I'm trying to figure out Is it How
many of the species is it obvious that
there's like like pelvis differences or
like So, so pelvis differences works on
like humans and apes and maybe a couple
of other mammals, but it's mostly not
very good because we It's because we
give birth to such a gigantic baby with
a gigantic head compared to our sizes
that women have different pelvises to
men. And then there's size differences.
Like the skull is not as reliable as the
pelvis. And then again, you just need to
look at, you know, humans are always
slightly dodgy with this because of, you
know, our evolutionary history and
cultural history, but like
you know, there's there's population
differences. You know, you you There are
There are maneless female lions in
places. There are maneless male lions in
places.
Um reindeer, uh female reindeer have
antlers in winter.
So, Rudolph was a girl because every
illustration of Santa and his reindeer
ever had They all have antlers, and
that's that's a female reindeer, not a
male, if it's winter. So, basically, we
don't know much about the dating and the
sex lives of uh T-Rexes. Well, not much,
but you can make some inferences. So,
for example,
um all tyrannosaurs uh have at least
some kind of crest on the head. The
early ones have like this midline crest
It really doesn't work on a human. They
have like a midline crest running along
the top of the nose that sticks up.
The later ones largely don't, but they
do have this weird armored structure
along those fused nasals, and then they
have little horns over the eyes.
Those, as far as we can tell, don't
really have any kind of obvious
mechanical function. And loads like
outside of the feathered dinosaurs, the
vast majority of dinos of carnivorous
dinosaurs have some kind of crest or
display feature on the head. When you
say display feature, meaning for sex
appeal, to attract mates? Or something
like that. So, I I've always favored the
term socio-sexual selection to cover
both sexual display and sexual dominance
and communication, um but also social
ones because those two things are hard
to tell apart. Female lions find males
with darker manes sexier,
but male lions find males with darker
manes more intimidating. So, one of them
is sex, but one of them is social. Nice.
And then the
I mean, I guess it could goes hand in
hand. Sure. It It It can, but then you
get things like the other one I go for
is black swans. These beautiful
Australian birds have these really weird
curly feathers on their wings. And males
and females both have them. And males
prefer females with curlier feathers,
and females prefer males with curlier
feathers as an obvious sexual link, but
then females fight, too. Females fight
over the best nesting spots.
And the females with the curliest
feathers tend to win those fights. How
does that make sense? This gets into
classic sexual selection theory. It's
It's what's called an honest signal.
You couldn't have those curly feathers
if you weren't able to support them. Oh,
yeah.
>> primary feathers on the wings, and what
it actually does is it makes it harder
to fly.
So, you're basically going,
"Look how tough I am. I've grown this
big and I can fly and carry on with my
giant curly feathers
because I'm really tough and I'm in good
shape." And it's the same with the lion
The reason you get pale lions in the
south is cuz it's or close to the
equator cuz it's too hot.
So, there's the trade-off cuz if you
have a really black mane, yeah, all the
males know you're
rock and all the females know you're
super sexy, but you just die of
overheating. The trade-off is if the
heat's going to kill you,
you're probably better off being a bit
paler
and surviving
in order to reproduce than you are being
jet black but just dying instantly as
soon as it gets hot. So, there's
trade-offs there. Okay.
>> Yeah. And that's probably what's
happening with the theropods.
The
all the little crests and horns,
Ceratosaurus, Dilophosaurus,
Tyrannosaurus, Allosaurus have big
crests over the eyes and all kinds of
others.
My I've written about this. I think this
is the trade-off.
They're going for the sexiest look, and
the sexiest look is the biggest horns or
the biggest spikes and whatever's on the
head, probably also then with the
brightest colors and the most display
patterns.
But also, this
this gives you away to your prey. If
you're trying to hide or you're trying
to sneak up on something, being brightly
colored or having stripes or all this
extra stuff on your head, you you you
get spotted. But then that's the
trade-off is if I'm this big and my
horns are my horns are this big and this
red and yellow, and I can still whoop I
can still run those guys down and hunt
them and kill them and eat them, Yeah.
then look how great I must be. Whereas
that little guy, he's only got weedy
little crests and they're and they're
really dark because he's so bad at
catching stuff, he doesn't have the
extra energy to grow big crests.
And so, that's why but when you're a
herbivore, you don't have that pressure.
Particularly something like this is
Protoceratops, but something like
Triceratops and these guys, they're
living in big groups. You can't hide
from a predator when you're a group of
20 animals that are 10 tons each. So,
who cares?
You just grow the biggest signal you can
possibly grow, and lo and behold, they
have giant frills and giant horns. Uh
what what can you say about beauty in
evolution? So, something that's
uh maybe you can educate me about
something that's not quite an honest
signal, that's just pure beauty, like
peacock feathers.
>> So, there are things which we think
operate closer to that. So, there are
These are the two kind of classic ideas
of sexual selection and both are
probably true to certain degrees in
various different species. One is the
honest signal of a is the kind of
handicap hypothesis because it you're
holding yourself back while proving you
can still do it. I ran the marathon
you know
carrying a couple of weights you're
obviously stronger than the guy who ran
the marathon without. And so that's why
it's an honest signal and it's why it's
a handicap. But the other one is what's
called the sexy sons hypothesis.
And the idea is a female might just find
a male attractive
for no other reason than random. There
is
some component of her brain or whatever
it may be that that just looks cool. And
you can actually sort of get this as a
human. Like forget forget human beauty
you could you can look at a bottle and
go that bottle's kind of nice and that
bottle's kind of ugly. Where do you put
like like birds are interesting with
this? Where what do you put peacock
feathers?
So they're they're probably more
handicap hypothesis because the colors
that go into them and the sheer size and
shape.
>> And these things basically can't fly. Um
they're really vulnerable to predators.
Can that handicap hypothesis explain
just how beautiful peacock feathers get?
Cuz they go they go extremely Probably
not entirely. There's there's almost
certainly randomness going on in there
as well. And then the eye spots we know
that eye spots are attractive are
probably encoded in some way. Um but
yeah so going back to the sexy sons the
idea is females prefer something
different for whatever reason. And there
might actually be some reasons females
prefer things that are different.
Different usually means
separate and outside. And that usually
comes with it variation like in
inherently. So variation is evolutionary
a turn on. Yeah basically.
Wouldn't that man you're rolling a dice
though aren't you? Yeah well you
right so you you've you've got to
remember again it's really easy to look
at that sort of thing with a human
perspective where maximum reproductive
output I think the the record there's
there's some obscure record it's
something like 66 children which is
probably apocryphal for this Russian
woman who had loads of triplets and
quads.
But like
humans don't have many offspring.
But most animals
lay dozens of eggs or hundreds of eggs
or thousands of eggs at a time. So
actually So diversity pays off more
there.
>> So diversity can pay off. We we think
that's probably a major part of the
reason that sex evolved in the first
place. Is it's gives you resistance to
changing environment and it gives you
resistance to parasites and diseases
which often reproduce way faster than
you do.
You know bacteria can divide in a few
hours we reproduce every 20 years.
That's quite a difference. If we were
all asexual clones and you're vulnerable
to some disease you're probably going to
get wiped out. Look at the you know
Irish potato famine or something like
that.
Um
So different may be appealing simply
because it is different. It's giving you
variation.
Um and there's at least some evidence
for that. There's um swordtails. So
anyone who keeps little fish
uh if anyone sees a tropical fish uh
keeper uh swordtails are really quite
common little tropical fish that you can
get in all the kinds of aquarium shops
and they're a fairly boring fish shape
but the lower lobe of their tail has a
big spike on it and that's the name. And
they're really close relatives of group
called the mollies which basically don't
have that. And in the wild there are
these rare Amazonian fish they don't
usually encounter each other. But even
if you go and get not even the
domesticated form cuz these things have
been bred for you know decades at this
point. You can go and get some wild
mollies and give them a wild male
swordtail and they think he's so much
better than all the male mollies.
They will go for that one and they will
preferentially mate with that one. And
we don't know the exact mechanism but it
appears to be it looks similar enough
that I recognize it as a potential mate
but different enough that this is
exciting.
And then this is where the sexy sons
kick in because the females are now
assuming those animals are successful
and they can hybridize or maybe it's
just a male who just happens to be a
little bit bluer or a little bit redder
or whatever it may be.
Um well the female offspring the
daughters are probably going to inherit
mother's preference I really like red.
And the males
are probably going to have red in them
because their dad had more red. So guess
what the next generation does.
There's more red and the females like
more red. And you don't have to come
back much further and suddenly all the
males are bright red.
And that's
closer to beauty than I think almost
anything else would be with still a
naturalistic explanation. We kind of
start talking about beauty from how much
social life Yeah a T-Rex might have. A
T-Rex might have so
I just to kind of take that to a place
of what we know and what we don't know.
So can we kind of know something about
their
their social life where they lived how
they lived?
>> So the very fact that they have these
apparently socio-sexually selected
signals the the crest and stuff in the
head
So there's a branch of sexual selection
called mutual sexual selection and the
the black swans are an example example
of this. The the classic sexual
selection is yeah your peacocks and your
lions and things like this. Males are
bigger and more flamboyant and whatever
it is and they're doing all the
competing.
But you have mutual sexual selection and
this is really common in a whole bunch
of things that people are familiar with
but don't know. Loads of seabirds. Um
starlings the common starling that we
have Europe and has been introduced into
the US. Parrots various other things
where basically males and females invest
similarly in rearing the offspring. And
so the idea generally both with handicap
and sexy son but particularly with
handicap is the idea is the males are
proving their worth. They're basically
saying I'm the biggest strongest
healthiest I've got the best genes I
should be the father of your offspring.
They go around showing off and then mate
with as many females as possible while
the females then do all the work and
make the nest and look after the chicks
and yeah or rear them or give birth or
whatever it may be yadda yadda yadda.
And so the idea with mutual sexual
selection is well what if there's not
much food around? Well things like
puffins you know penguins in the Arctic
you know where the male sits with the
egg and the female toddles off gets food
and then comes back 2 months later or
whatever it is.
Um
On their own they can't rear the
offspring. They have to have a male
investment.
Well now
suddenly the male's now putting loads of
effort in.
So the male's now in the same position
that a female would be in under the
normal conditions. You don't want to be
the sexiest toughest biggest male and
you can only mate once. All right
there's there's various cheats but we
won't get into that just yet. You're
only going to mate once and you're going
to put all your effort into helping
rearing offspring rather than chasing
down as many girls as possible.
Are you going to go for the biggest
fittest female as well or you going to
go for the small weedy one that doesn't
look very well?
You go for the best one. Well how do you
know that? Well cuz she's got a crest as
well.
And so suddenly you now get mutual
ornamentation just like the black swans
where the males are checking out the
curliest females and the females are
checking out the curliest males. And
you'll see they mutually pair up. This
is what we see with things like
starlings. Males like the brightest
females females like the brightest males
they tend to form pairs. The darkest and
least bright ones are obviously kind of
left with each other at the bottom of
the pile they tend to pair up. But it
means that when you've got signals in
both males and females like every
Triceratops or every Tyrannosaurus it at
least hints
that they're going down this route.
And that they might cooperate for
reproduction. Wow another like weak
signal that tells a partial story.
>> is it's compromised by lots of things so
that goes back to your earlier question
about telling males from females apart.
The vast majority of dinosaur species
like 90 plus percent are known from a
single specimen.
And a specimen is not necessarily very
complete at all. It might be a couple of
bones. It might be one bone. It might be
a tooth in a couple of cases.
The actual number where we've got a
decent number of real
whole skeletons that we can actually
compare to each other
less than 10.
Probably more like five or six. Can I
ask you a weird question?
If you were to uh let's say
all humans died right now. Press the
button gone.
How much of human civilization would you
be able to reconstruct from just the
skeletons that are in the ground? Like
you just start collecting skeletons
there's a lot of them. There's there's
billions of them.
Would you be able to start telling a
story like urban centers? Yeah probably.
You probably reconstruct a lot right?
>> if nothing else just the you know
superlative brain cavity will tell you
quite a lot you know. Yeah the
intelligence. Must have thus been very
very smart with the brain that big. You
can probably reconstruct some of the
behavior a lot of the behavior social
behavior a lot of And you're you're
going to see stuff like you know it's
the famous one of I think it was a
Neanderthal
there was a famous question of like you
know at what point do you think society
exists?
And it may have been one of the Leakeys
but the answer was basically that this
skeleton because it was someone with a
really like a properly busted leg.
And then it fully healed.
And if that person was on their own
just dead someone had to look after them
for months to get that level of healing.
You only do that to someone you're
really devoted to and probably a group
of people cuz even one person can't look
after one other person in
Right. So that that's your society. And
yeah you think about the the pathology
of skeletons in the human race. How you
know how many of us have broken a bone?
Most Most adults have probably broken a
couple of bones, even if it's just a
finger or or a nose or something. But
then you think about what medicine has
done, and you would be able to see
treatments of complete compound
fractures of guys who survived horrific
car crashes, and treatments of cancer,
bone cancers, and stuff like that. You
would see that. Well, how's that
happening? Either they're magic, or
they've got some kind of In which case
they they'd probably cure it
instantly, or there's some kind of
technology in society
supporting that change. They're just
hinting at the fact that the the
evidence collection and the reasoning
mechanism that paleontology and
archaeology uses is really powerful.
Yeah. And so it it could be very
effective even even just with a small
amount of data. I mean, you But but it's
but it's the right amount of data.
That's the thing. We can We can find
dozens of skeletons that we can't do
very much with, and then the right one
that you know, things like stomach
contents, you know, that's a super or or
bite marks. That's a super powerful bit
of data, but it doesn't turn up that
often. So, it's not like you can get it
off every skeleton. And that's the
thing. It's It's the It's the pool of
data, and I think that's what people
miss. We We
as paleontologists, um we get caught up
on
single superlative specimens, and then
try and treat them as a
like a silver bullet almost. So,
Microraptor, I mentioned this before,
little flying dinosaur, crow-size or
gliding dinosaur, crow-size thing from
China. We've got uh at least a dozen
good specimens of it by now, and
multiple ones with stomach contents.
Um there's one I've described with a
little mammal foot inside it. There's
one with a bird inside it. There's one
with a lizard inside it, and there's one
with a fish inside it.
On their own, and this happened for at
least two of the papers describing these
things, it's like it ate fish. These are
fish-eating animals. No, that one ate
one fish once.
That one ate one bird once. That one ate
one mammal once, and that one ate one
lizard once.
So, what have we actually got here?
I suspect we've got a group of
generalists, and we just happen to have
found them eating different things at
different times.
But equally, it's also possible at least
that yeah,
this is one of these things, and it had
learned to eat fish when the others
hadn't. And actually, this was most of
the fish eaters, and the others ate
whatever they could get. Maybe one
caught a bird up a tree in a nest. Maybe
one found it dead on the ground.
You don't really know what one of these
things on its own is fascinating,
but potentially misleading. The way
you're describing it now, it seems like
yes, it's potentially misleading, but
there's
in your whole way of being, in the way
you've been talking about this stuff, I
can see that
it's not just the direct evidence you're
mentioning. It's like it's a bunch of
intuitions you build up.
It's like you're stitching together a
bunch of little things. It's the
Sherlock Holmes thing. It's not just the
clearly this one piece of evidence. It's
like, okay, what do I know about the
general other dinosaurs around the area,
what the the the the the different
animals, how animals usually behave
about this period, about the
environment, and all of that comes
together, and then Yeah. And and and and
and so, one thing I've definitely
written about um is yeah, the the
independent lines of evidence. Can you
get stuff that is as far as possible
truly independent from the other data,
and does it give you the same answer?
And then when it does,
that's incredibly powerful. Um so,
Spinosaurus, or the the spinosaurs as a
whole, is my go-to example for this of
the
guys, the famous big sail back and the
weird crocodile-like head. Uh though
some of them look rather different to
that. And if you look across all the
species and specimens that we have, and
they're incredibly fragmentary and very
badly known,
but they're all basically associated
with
um
when you look at the gestalt, you see a
whole bunch of stuff for these things.
So, they do have crocodile-like head and
crocodile-like teeth compared to every
other
carnivorous dinosaur. And when you do
the mechanical analysis, you see they
function in a very similar way. And
indeed,
teeth Uh here's a Spinosaurus teeth uh
with very nearly circular cross-section.
Really distinctive. Similar to
crocodiles, similar to dolphins, similar
to fish-eating fish. So, points to fish.
Crocodile-like head. Points to fish.
Crocs eat other stuff, too, but still.
Um They usually found in or near aquatic
systems. Now,
fossils in general tend to turn up in
aquatic systems cuz you've got to be
buried to become a fossil, so
water association is common. But even
so,
that's true. They turn up in places
where lots of other dinosaurs don't tend
to turn up,
including carnivores, which suggests
they're eating
something else.
Um if you look at the isotopic signature
of the teeth,
um often it correlates with crocodiles,
fish, turtles, and stuff that lives in
water, and doesn't correlate well with
other land-living dinosaurs that lived
in the same time and same place.
So, you put all of that together,
and it's really hard to argue Oh, in
addition to the tiny detail of Baryonyx,
the British one, was found with fish
scales inside its chest cavity. So, you
put all of that together, and yeah, I'm
not saying it only ate fish. I'm sure it
ate big shrimp and turtles, and we know
they were predating on terrestrial
dinosaurs and pterosaurs, cuz again,
stomach contents and teeth and stuff.
But fundamentally, this is an animal or
a group of animals doing something
different to the other carnivorous
dinosaurs, and it's probably linked to
water, and it's probably linked to fish
as a predominant way of living. We
should mention that you're working on a
book out in early 2026? Um so, in the
UK, it'll be out in November. In North
America, January or February 2026. It's
It's called Spinosaurus Tales, the
biology and ecology of the spinosaurs.
And uh Written with Mark Witton, who did
that picture. It's a beautiful creature.
>> which I think is in there. He Mark's
done a ton of new artwork. He He helped
write the book, but he's also the the
artist. I mean, can you describe a
little bit more about this creature?
There's a There's a bunch of stuff like
what you just mentioned. There's some
debate.
Weird.
Is it Is it hump To what degree is it
aquatic? So, what what Not very is my
take. So, does it live in the water?
Does it step in the water? Does it I
Yeah, so I think it's basically a big
wader. It's a poor analogy, but it's a
very weird giant stork. Oh.
God damn it. Was giant. Um yeah, so
potentially bigger than T-Rex, linearly
not in mass. Again, really quite narrow
chest versus that T-Rex
barrel.
But potentially 15 m long, so bigger
than any T-Rex we found, at least in
terms of length. Can you describe what
it looks like though? I mean, there's
some iconic features to it, right? Yeah,
so this really quite long head
um with a kind of wavy jawline, like
like animals have for you know, most
carnivores have straight jaws. This one
has a kind of um somewhat wiggly
jawline. It really narrows at the front,
and then opens up again into like a
little It's called a rosette. So, you've
got like a little semicircle, and then a
dip, and then the jaws go back, and then
the teeth line waves up and down. These
really conical teeth, which doesn't
sound very exciting, but it makes them
different to every other carnivorous
dinosaur. Like no other thing has a
conical tooth, which is a classic fish
thing, or at least biting hold of
something that wriggles.
Um
The nostrils are not at the tip of the
nose, they're pushed back at least
somewhat. It has a bunch of crests on
the head. It's got quite a long neck.
Spinosaurus, and at least a couple of
the other closest relatives to it, thing
called Ichthyovenator from uh I can't
remember if it's Thailand or Laos. I
think it's Laos. Has this giant
elongated bit to the top of the
vertebrae, and so it gives it this giant
sail along the back.
Spinosaurus, at least possibly
Ichthyovenator, probably not any of the
others, then has this weird like thin
like newt-like expanse to the top of the
tail, giving it kind of like a giant oar
paddle appearance.
Mostly, they have very large arms with
giant claws on the hands.
Um and Spinosaurus at least appears to
have really quite short legs, but the
others don't. Um
But again, so the the
Spinosaurus is like totally iconic, but
if you look at something like Baryonyx
from the UK, or um
Suchomimus from Niger,
it's still got the same head. It's still
got the same neck. It's still got the
same arms, but it doesn't have this
sail, and it doesn't have this tail, and
it probably doesn't have short legs. So,
Spinosaurus is
super weird and exaggerated version of
what it was already a kind of super
weird group of theropods. So,
Spinosaurus is properly strange. And
then, as you kind of hinted at, like
super controversial as well, because
various papers have
claimed it's a diver, or a really good
swimmer, and I think the evidence for
that is
very weak at best. So, your book is
going to be You're going to start some
with your book. It's going to be
all sorts of controversy.
>> I I think I think I already have, to be
honest. Like, I've written
I've written three major papers, and one
in particular with my colleague Tom
Holtz, where we
frankly savaged the idea that it's a
good swimmer. Um and then other people
have since, including actually some of
the authors who were on the original
paper claiming it did swim well, have
now effectively reversed their position
and said it didn't. So, the Jurassic
Park 3 fight between the two? Yeah.
Famous uh real-life encounter, who wins?
So, probably still T-Rex. I mean, the
the Jurassic Park Spinosaurus was pretty
good for its time um because some of the
stuff that I've just talked about,
particularly the short legs, was
suggested way back in 1910-1912,
but it was really uncertain. Um now it
appears to be more likely the case than
not. The tail was unknown at this point,
so it was given a very generic tail.
Um but the crocodile-like head is pretty
good. The neck's a bit short. The sail
is a bit too, like it's almost just like
a semicircle stuck on the back and it's
a bit more complicated than that. Um,
but personally I'm quite a big fan of
the Jurassic Park 3 Spinosaurus. I think
for its era it's really quite good. Um,
it is massive. So there is this, um,
they're from
I'm going to say Morocco
cuz Spinosaurus is found throughout
North Africa, Morocco, Algeria, Egypt.
There's a massive pair of jaws or snout
that's in a collection in
Milan
that's absolutely outsized, just like an
absolute giant. And that points to a
truly monumentally sized Spinosaurus,
which is where all these upper estimates
of 15 plus meters come from. It's just
this one set of jaws. But yeah, it it's
about right, but it's just a bit too
muscly and a bit too bulky. Um, but in
gross appearance it's pretty good.
>> Does it have a chance against a T-Rex?
No, because it's got this unbelievably
long thin jaw
which, whilst much stronger than
something like Baryonyx, is
fundamentally not that strong. The the
jaws are very long and thin and then the
teeth are, yeah, they're big, but
they're not
big big. Um
you know, the the the whole like it
grabs the T-Rex neck and then like snaps
it. Well Spinosaurus actually its neck
is really strong going up and down and
is very weak rotating or going side to
side. So it's got the weakest kind of
possible neck to like rotate and snap
the T-Rex. And then T-Rex has got like
the strongest neck of anything. So
you've got like the weakest jaw with the
weakest spin versus the strongest neck.
So no, I don't buy it.
So that brings us back to the topic we
touched on a little bit. What are you've
mentioned a bunch of the stuff that the
Jurassic Park series gets wrong.
Uh, maybe you can speak to more things,
but also what does it get right?
So a lot of
like very
in some level generic, but quite
important things it gets right.
T-Rex is about the right size and shape
and is massive and you don't actually
see it run, you see it power walk. If
you watch the Jeep chase again, you'll
see it only ever has one foot on the
ground. The weird thing for me is how
much some of them vary. So like I'm a
big pterosaur guy, I do lots of work on
pterosaurs, the flying reptiles. The
Pteranodons
in Jurassic Park
2, The Lost World, you see them very
very briefly in one of the last shots
and they're okay, but they're not great.
But it's clearly a bit of a throwaway
shot. The ones in Jurassic Park 3, I
think are mostly excellent. Really
really good. And then the ones in
Jurassic World are terrible, like a
massive regression.
There's loads and loads of details that
are right in JP3 that are completely
wrong in Jurassic World. And you're
like, why did you take a really good
model and make it much much worse and
less accurate? I don't understand.
Um, and I
again, it's fiction.
At one level who cares, but like
as as you said, like
I I don't think the see the weird thing
for me is
I don't think it would affect
how they're perceived by the public. I
Some things I get, like for example, in
Jurassic World the Pteranodons pick
people up with their feet and fly off
with them. Pteranodons' feet don't work
like that, it would never be able to do
that and it would never have the lift.
But I get for dramatic purposes you
might want to show that. Okay,
fine, you know, this is your big
sequence, you need that. But for the
rest of the animal
it's weirdly inaccurate and I don't
think the public would
know
and they might well care if it was much
more accurate.
And I don't think it would be any harder
to make it accurate than to make it
inaccurate.
Um, I spoke to a colleague of mine who I
won't name just in case I get him into
trouble, um, who's a big dinosaur nerd,
but also a big creature creator and
designer and has done a whole bunch of
proper Hollywood A-list movie stuff.
And I asked him about this and I went
okay, but like is it just easier to take
the model that you've got and mess
around with it than to if I came in and
said, you need to fix that, you need to
fix this, you need to fix this, you need
to fix that. And he basically went, nah,
it's about the same amount of effort.
It's not like
we don't have the director or the
producer or the lead designer going, no,
I want that arm a bit longer, I want
that tail a bit brighter, can you add a
few more bits there, I don't like those
scales. So he said, we're doing that
constantly anyway. So doing it to one
set of design specs versus another set
of design specs is no more hassle. In
other words, he said, it's no harder to
make it accurate than to make it
inaccurate. And it's like, if that's
truly the case
then just make it right.
And then you can claim a level of
accuracy and engagement that you can. I
mean, it's interesting. There's there's
a thing called the Jurassic Foundation.
After the first Jurassic Park
made an absolute fortune, Spiel, I think
it was Spielberg directly, maybe through
Universal, but anyway, they set up the
Jurassic Foundation
and it's a small fund of money for
research on dinosaurs and related
animals and academics can apply for it.
My PhD One of my PhD students got some
money from the Jurassic Foundation.
Like that's great. He didn't have to do
that. He went, paleontology's helped
give me this, I'm going to give back a
bit. And after what must be what, 30
years now, it's probably funded an awful
lot of research and helped young
researchers get a start.
So there's a level of engagement there
that I think hasn't been in
subsequent films, which you can
kind of see if once it goes from being
a one-off to being a franchise and it's
changed hands. I mean, how many
different directors has it had now?
Uh, you know, Spielberg did the first
two and then
don't know about the next five, must be
two if not another three more people.
Uh, you know, and 30 years later it it's
it's all changing.
Yeah, but that's the paradox of creating
a legendary film. Yeah, that that depth
of accuracy. And it's not that difficult
to work, but it's also it does something
to the to the whole artistic creation.
If you create a culture of where the
details really really matter.
>> Yeah, and and again there's there's some
oddities. So like Gallimimus, I
mentioned it earlier, so one of the
ornithomimosaurs. The model of a
Gallimimus in Jurassic World
is nearly identical to that from
Jurassic Park. One of the differences,
which you can barely see on film, but I
know this is true because I found it in
like Jurassic World kids book cuz I
flipped through it when it came out.
It's a close-up of the head with an
arrow to the teeth.
Gallimimus doesn't have teeth, it's got
a beak.
So someone has taken the original model
and actively spent time adding teeth to
an animal that didn't have them.
I would understand it. I'm not saying I
agree with it, but I understand if if it
was a rule of cool and like, yeah, but
it would look so much better with all
these gnarly big teeth and whatever. And
it's like
you can't even see it in the final
thing. They've got tiny little heads. In
the film all they do is like run past
the camera briefly.
It's not like they're a big carnivore
and they're engaged in like one of the
big battle like, why? Why?
It's not like you can't even barely see
them. Uh, well, yeah, again just to
linger on it, there is a lot of value to
authenticity in all walks of life and
one of them is accuracy. When you're
talking about dinosaurs, it's so
valuable and so
worthy and it's respectable for the long
life of a film to be accurate. I just
wish I I hope they do that. There's
certain directors that really
dogmatically push that. Alex Garland
comes to mind.
You know, he he did whenever he
integrates like quantum computing or AI
into a film.
>> No, you learn with the black hole in
Interstellar where they ended up
publishing a paper on the calculation to
visualize that.
>> That's great. That's really And like you
think that has nothing to do with the
story, the narrative of the film, but it
does. It like permeates everything. If
you get that black hole right
that everybody else steps up their game
and really
really tells a story in this way that
reverberates through time and every it
like really moves people. So Yeah, I I
yeah, I mean, as I say, I I I wish it
was better. I mean, the the only thing
I'd I'd flip it around, it's a joke I've
made more than once, but like just just
don't take it as a documentary. No one
wants watches James Bond and goes,
that's how international espionage
works. You know, he's got the laser
watch and the exploding car and it's
like may maybe treat it a bit as
fiction. I I I've heard from a friend of
mine
who worked at the Royal Tyrrell Museum,
which I I mentioned before in in
Alberta, which is an absolute phenomenal
place.
Um, and she said after the first one
genuinely
like it was not common, but more than
once
people were annoyed that they didn't
have the real dinosaurs out back because
they'd seen them and they knew that the
real ones were out there.
Which is a testament to Industrial Light
& Magic and Stan Winston, but also
slightly horrifying that anyone watched
Jurassic Park and literally thought that
Also, why do you go to a museum? You go
to the zoo if it's alive. There you will
also meet, uh, what is it, King Kong and
Godzilla.
>> Yeah, yeah.
Uh
I don't think we quite touched on this.
I really want to ask you about, uh,
intelligence. What we know about the
intelligence of, let's say, T-Rex. We
talked about his big head. What do we
know about Not much. So there's there's
a T-Rex brain or at least a very rough
cast of part of one. That's the actual
look of
>> Yeah, that this is
So dinosaurs, in fact most reptiles, I
don't know if you can see it on the
Velociraptor.
Not really, unfortunately. Um It's
elongated. Yeah, but it it's more that
they have we we are weird in that we
have a brain that basically fills the
inside of our skull. What most animals
have is actually a little kind of sub
skull inside the main skull, which is
called the endocast. Or endocrinium.
And the brain is in that.
Um and even then it's not like full of
brain because we've packed an awful lot
of brain into our limited space and then
then have quite a lot of goo and fat and
other stuff around it. Um but it means
for dinosaurs and then reptiles and
birds in general,
in the old days you could basically cut
one open but now we'll CT scan through
them.
You can take an internal mold of the
endocrinium, the brain case,
and then
whatever filled that would have been the
brain and its surrounding tissues. And
that's how you get something like this.
The In this case someone literally
cracked open an old skull and basically
took an internal mold in the same way
that you do an external mold for the for
the skulls.
And that tells you quite a lot about
certain things. Um so for example,
you've got a bulb at the front which is
the olfactory bulb. So brains are very
stereotyped again, ours are super weird.
So you have your olfactory bulb at the
front and behind that you have the optic
bulb or the optic lobe. So roughly how
big they are will tell you roughly how
much of the brain is devoted to, for
example, sight and smell. So if it's a
lot, it's pretty good. If there's not
much, it's not very good.
That goes quite a long way already. Um
one thing we've done in the last few
years is you can also get into the It's
not shown here. It wouldn't be part of
this. Uh but the inner ear.
We can CT scan into the structure of the
bony inner ear. And from that you can
actually get an idea of what frequency
of sounds the inner ear was structured
to be pitched to.
Wow.
>> doesn't actually tell you very much but
it's phenomenally cool that you can do
it.
>> Well, you should say you also have quite
a bit of a background in biology. So
you're trying to reconstruct biology
from
go from paleontology paleontology Yeah,
I my my go-to one-liner is I'm a
zoologist but I work on dead stuff.
My degree was zoology. I My official job
title now is reader of zoology. I teach
zoology. I don't teach paleo. Um so
yeah, living animals was always actually
my primary interest and I kind of fell
into paleo. But then I wanted to drag
that with me because I'd been trained in
behavior and ecology and that's what I
was most interested in. So then applying
that knowledge and understanding
to these animals. So to some degree it
is possible to reach towards the
biology. Absolutely. Yeah. So with the
ear, that's interesting. The brain. So
we can know something about the brain.
Yeah, but then but then when you get
into intelligence is when it gets really
awkward because working out exactly
which bits of this
are probably linked to like the main
fundamental processing and what you link
to actual intelligence is tough.
Um on top of that we don't really know
what's been the big challenge of the
last couple of years is question of
what's T-Rex and other dinosaurs super
intelligent of like neuron density. How
many basically nerve cells can you pack
in per bit of volume because birds have
some weird tricks which means they get a
lot more brain per volume. Um just how
much of the brain case was brain and how
much was like goop around it, we know
varies. So you get a kind of fairly big
upper and lower bound. And then the
other big thing we always have to do is
factor in size. Big animals need bigger
brains to operate them. So whales have
really big brains but whales weigh tens
of tons. They're not smarter than us. So
you have the the classic thing is I
think called the um encephalization
quotient which is at a very simple level
it is the volume of brain scaled against
the size of the animal. So
we have huge brains compared to how big
we are. So we're massively up the chart
and then you do have a few things with
like worms. I should probably stick to
vertebrates.
So some stupid stuff which has a
surprisingly small brain for its size.
Most things that aren't primates
and things like crows and parrots sit
very neatly on a couple of different
curves. There's a curve for reptiles, a
curve for birds, a curve for mammals and
things like this. Um and
basically that's it. But also actually
our understanding of mass estimates for
dinosaurs
is good but not great. And so you could
easily be out by
you could easily be out by like 20 or
30%
on the volume of the brain inside the
brain case and then you could be out by
20 or 30% on your mass estimate. Well,
now suddenly
it's very easy to make the brain too big
and the animal too light and it's super
smart or make the brain too small and
the animal too heavy and it's super
dumb.
So um that's awkward unfortunately. So
apparently there's a some controversial
paper that suggests that T-Rex is a has
primate level intelligence. Yeah, and
then that was shot down within a few
months by a team of paleontologists and
a couple of other neurologists who
really went to town on it. Just counting
the number of T-Rex T-Rex estimate the
number of neurons. Yeah, it was the
neuron density thing and yeah, I
I I've unsurprisingly support the
revised one which was done by a whole
bunch Yeah, the Caspar paper.
Um I've spoken to Caspar about it,
couple of the other authors. So they
scaled down the number of neurons from 3
billion down to 250 million to 1.7
billion which is similar to crocodiles
not primates. Yeah, which is kind of
what you'd expect. I mean a couple of
other people at various times have
suggested they're really smart. And
again, you know, birds have this thing
of they have this weird thing of neuron
folding and they can basically pack in a
lot more than you'd expect. You know,
that's why crows are that smart despite
having
tiny brains relatively even compared to
their overall size. Um but
I'm
being obviously overly facetious. But if
ultimately part of your scaling is how
big is the animal versus how big is its
brain,
that's most of a T-Rex brain. It's a
fraction of the size of a chimp brain
and chimps don't weigh 7 tons. So
you you you know, it's a kind of
Hitchens-like extraordinary claims
require extraordinary evidence. But like
you just look at it and go, that's about
the proportion we'd expect for a croc.
Now crocs are smarter than people think
but they're sure as hell not monkeys. Um
you're going to have to really come up
with something much more convincing than
oh well, if you just pack them in and
you scale them this way.
Uh a bit of a ridiculous question but is
it possible to find evidence of tool
use?
I mean
in theory it it depends how you quite
how you define a tool. So birds building
nests is arguably tool use to a certain
degree.
I'm aware of
I I suspect it's turned out not to be
the case. I was I was shown
a
very rough, not very well prepared
fossil
20 years ago now. No, 15 years ago now
where someone said we think this might
be a early bird nest and therefore
potentially even a dinosaur nest.
And nothing's ever been published. So my
guess is once they
excavated it and had a good look at it,
they went, nah, it's nothing really.
I mean I guess the question is how would
you know? Yeah, definitely it would be
difficult unless it's obvious widespread
primate-like
>> even then like you know, CP on my phone
you you know, chimp chimps make loads of
tools but it's mostly made of wood and
they're mostly just breaking stuff and
then that's the odds of that preserving
a very low. You do get things like
chimps and otters, sea otters, you know,
they have their favorite anvil and
hammer stones to break stuff open. But
again, the reason they picked that stone
is because it's really heavy and good at
breaking oysters or breaking nuts. It's
not going to leave or probably not going
to leave stereotypical points on the
rock and even then you could just go,
well, maybe it
you know,
just got bashed up in a river or
something. So in your book Uncovering
Dinosaur Behavior, you you kind of
conclude that there's a lot we might not
know. What's the particular lost
behavior
that we don't know about that you think
might be out there?
Something like midden use. It's a whole
bunch of animals and birds who
basically crap in the same spot. They
they have their spot and that's where
they go. So
rabbits do this, sloths do this, um
aardvarks, even things like wildebeest
and zebra I don't know what the zebra uh
impala will tend to go back to the same
place every day.
But
the fossil record of So coprolites,
fossilized feces and fossilized waste
from dinosaurs, it exists but it's
extremely rough because of course this
is the stuff that's already been
digested and broken down. It's already
kind of gooey and broken up and doesn't
have a lot going for it.
Um
If they do it in water, it's going to
dissipate instantly. If it rains, it's
probably going to fall apart. Things
like dung beetles and flies will break
it down. Even if it gets covered by sand
or whatever from a sandstorm, it's
probably still going to compress and
separate.
So are you ever going to find it?
Maybe. Go going back to our trackway
stuff. But even if you do, what species
left that? We know a big herbivore did
this but was it Triceratops? Was it an
ankylosaur? Those animals are very
different things doing very different
things and it would tell you different
things about their behavior if we know.
Yeah, so one one one piece of behavior I
forgot to ask you about was
T-Rex
engaging cannibalism. Yeah, almost
certainly well certainly I think we've
got
um there's a T-Rex bone with a T-Rex
embedded tooth in it. With
overgrowth? Yeah. There's I think it's
I want to say it's now Albertosaurus
rather than T-Rex. But there is a there
is a Tyrannosaur jaw in Alberta
with a T-Rex tooth stuck in it and you
can pull the little tooth out. Um and
then there's a T-Rex foot bone
with these distinctive feeding traces on
them. And this actually goes back to
that early point about T-Rex being
weird, being the only big carnivore in
its environment, because if this was
even Mongolia at that time, but anywhere
else,
there's three or four or five big
carnivores. And so, you find a bone, and
it's chewed up by a big carnivore, we
don't know who did it.
But when you see a big bone chewed up in
a T-Rex ecosystem, well,
you know, if it's anything bigger than
this, you know it was T-Rex. And so,
when it's a T-Rex bone with T-Rex bite
marks,
Yep. QED. Yeah, so it must have been.
That's fascinating, isn't it? That they
would attack themselves.
Well,
cannibalism turns up in a whole bunch of
stuff.
Um
but it's not it's very rare as like a
fairly habitual behavior. So, but
there's several reasons you might be
engaging in or or rather teeth marks
might tell various stories. So, it could
be just fighting for dominance, right?
>> It It could, but it's unlikely. And in
this case, so again, we see there are
loads of facial injuries in
Tyrannosaurus, in carnivorous dinosaurs
generally, but particularly
Tyrannosaurus. They have really beaten
up heads, like half or even 2/3 of
adults have scarring and facial
injuries. But you see healing on it.
Whereas this foot does not show healing.
And it's got multiple different bites.
The idea that you'd bite a foot whilst
fighting someone and then go back and
bite that one foot again, that's pretty
not impossible, but pretty unlikely.
>> look looks like it's eating that thing.
>> Yeah, and they're more like the feeding
scrape traces than they are the big
puncture wounds. So again, not
impossible, but very weird for that to
occur in a fight. Um so yeah, they're
they're they're fighting. They're
fighting probably quite a lot. Um but
whether or not you actually eat
something that you've
killed or that you stumble across as a
body,
it definitely happens occasionally,
otherwise we wouldn't have the record of
that. But there's a reason carnivores
often don't eat carnivores and
particularly don't eat
their own species, which is parasitism.
You know, carnivores in general are
loaded with parasites, because they
spend their whole lives eating food
which has parasites and stuff in it, and
so they tend to accumulate a lot of
them. What's the one thing that's going
to definitely going to have the most
parasites in it that can infect you as,
for example, a lion? It's another lion
that eats the exact same stuff that you
do. So, whilst it is food, and
particularly if you just won a big
fight, you might want to eat,
in general,
cannibalism's pretty rare, because it's
generally not a good idea if there's
other food available. But yeah, if
you're starving to death or, you know,
the other guy ripped your leg half off
and you know you're going to walk for 6
weeks,
not that you'd think, but you know what
I mean. Like and now and now there's a
body in front of you, it's 2 tons of
meat. Well, maybe you should tuck in.
This is so fascinating, like once again,
figuring out this puzzle. And like what
does cannibalism tell you? You're
piecing together the story of T-Rex,
their their life, their hunting life,
their social life, from their evolution
to their biology,
to their behavior. It's so fascinating.
Yeah, we we try to. But the thing is,
it's it's it's always getting better,
which is So that's the what I tried to
finish on in my book on behavior is I
felt I'd written a couple of hundred
pages of we keep screwing this up, we've
overstated this, I think people have
misunderstood this, this you know, the
trackway stuff, and it's like this is
not as confident as we think. Need to
look at these alternate explanations.
This behavior shows that that behavior
probably doesn't correlate the way you
said it does, yada yada yada. And it's
like, and I feel like I've just written
a book trashing my entire field and all
my colleagues, or at least many of my
colleagues. And then
then you you flip it on its head and
going, we've got techniques that were
undreamed of 10 years ago. We've got
data streams that were undreamed of 10
years ago.
And we've actually got a much better
understanding of living species. And
then on top of that, we're just
constantly finding new animals. You
know, we have not just
new species, which are often I think a
lot less important, but just new
specimens of ones we know, cuz again,
it's building up that
database. You know, we drifted off to
talk about sexual selection, but like
yeah, you If you want to know growth,
one or two animals doesn't tell you how
an animal a species grows. 50 or 100
does, and then that reveals a hell of a
lot more about things like sexual
dimorphism and growth rate and how
vulnerable juveniles are in population
structure and maybe how they're
reproducing. So,
I'd like to think I knocked down I think
I knocked down a few towers that
probably a few people were fond of,
but I think we have the raw materials to
build much better, stronger edifice of
behavior.
Um but as you say, it's it's always
going to be based around
often very piecemeal evidence and
like possibilities and probabilities
rather than certainties. Let's talk
about a sad topic, extinction. Yep.
How did the dinosaurs go extinct? Mostly
probably pretty quickly, but it really
is
the answer that I think most people are
now probably familiar with, which is
it's an asteroid impact or a some kind
of extraterrestrial body
hit
just off the coast of the Yucatan
Peninsula in Mexico about 66 million
years ago,
that basically atomized the asteroid,
but also importantly, the bit of the
ground it hit or below the seabed that
it hit was basically the worst kind of
rock, and so it put up this enormous ash
cloud, and basically you have a nearly
instantaneous nuclear winter.
I mean, immediate devastation.
You know, any anything immediately next
to it is obviously just like vaporized.
Uh but you know, this is the sort of
thing that's it's like hot enough to set
fire to the atmosphere. I think the one
I read was
it's something like a piece of rock
about the size of Mount Everest
traveling at something like 10 10 times
the speed of sound. So, just the
momentum between that speed and mass
thing is just,
you know,
beyond extraordinary. But I think what
does a lot of damage is the change in
the climate.
>> Yeah, and so so every there are five
recognized mass extinctions in the
history of life on Earth, and all of
them are ultimately some form of climate
change.
Um whether it's volcanic eruptions or
hyperoxygenation or an ice age or
whatever, it's it's it's climate
changing
too quickly for things to adapt to.
And that starts,
you know, that just cripples entire
populations and entire species, and then
if you do enough damage to enough
things, you start getting ecosystem
collapse. You know, that this moth has
died out. Well, it turns out that moth
is the primary pollinator of this tree.
Well, that tree produced nuts, and that
was the entire winter survival store for
this squirrel. Well, that squirrel was
the main
food of this cat, and now suddenly
the moth going has killed four other
things and and everything that's
attached to that. Um and so that that's
really what did for them. And sadly, the
big things, well, everything
dies, but the big things have a lot of
trouble recovering.
>> Yeah, so I mean, this this is
you know, a a classic example to oh
well, you know, what is paleontology
good for? Well, one actually really is
extinction, which is very relevant right
now in that we have a very good handle
on when you have extreme climate stress,
what tends to suffer more and what tends
to suffer less.
And as you say, big big things
fundamentally do. They require more
resources. They require more area of
land. You need to roam further, which
means, you know,
if you're a mouse and you happen to have
a little bit of land and that bit
doesn't get hit, you're fine. Whereas if
you're an elephant and you need all of
this land and even a chunk of it goes
wrong, well, that's probably maybe not
enough for you to survive anymore. So,
yeah, big things suffer
disproportionately badly from these
things. And mostly as well, we think um
terrestrial things generally do worse
than things in water, because water's a
great equilibriating medium. You know,
it takes ages to heat up, it takes ages
to cool down. Um yes, if you live in
um specific coastal conditions or
something, maybe you can't travel that
easily, but you know, whales can go
from pole to pole quite happily, and
plenty of other fish do, too. So, if
it's too hot or too cold or too nasty
here, you can just swim somewhere else.
Whereas if you're an animal and you hit
a desert or you hit a mountain range or
you hit a river, you stop moving and
you're trapped, and and then you die.
So, dinosaurs were yeah, the the worst
possible combination. They were mostly
big, and they were mostly on land. And
yeah, it's not really surprising they
did very badly out of it. And then some
species did survive.
Uh I guess I think you said that it's
it's very possible that some dinosaurs
even survived for a time that we we
might be able to discover dinos alive.
>> I'd be amazed if they didn't. I mean,
there's been various reports over the
decades of
the
KPG or KT extinction, the
Cretaceous-Paleogene or
Cretaceous-Tertiary extinction, of of
dinosaurs surviving. And none of them
have held up. It's usually been um
bioturbation. So, literally things like
prairie dogs digging. And of course,
they'll dig a tooth up and then move it
through the layers or things like this,
or plant roots can can move stuff. Um
or just soils can get churned up.
But I would be shocked if they didn't.
Not not like, oh yeah, the dinosaur
survived and the Loch Ness Monster and
stuff like that. Well, but but like
yes, it was a global devastation. Yes,
it's what ultimately killed the
dinosaurs. But I'd be amazed if there
wasn't some equivalent of Hawaii or New
Zealand or some other tucked-away island
or valley where actually dinosaurs were
fine for anything from a few hundred
thousand to a couple of million years.
But on a global scale, it's a dot on a
map, and the odds that we'll ever
uncover
any rocks fossiliferous rocks of that
age that we then have access to that we
then find a dinosaur in that we can then
date properly,
I think is almost non-existent, but it
would just be weird if they
didn't survive somewhere for a bit or
even quite a few of them in places. So,
a small local population? We see it all
the time, you know, the lemurs in
Madagascar,
all the stuff in New Zealand, there's
tons of weird archaic stuff hanging
around in Hawaii, you know, Galapagos
finches and tortoises even the tortoises
that you don't see anywhere else, in
Australia with the marsupials, they're
almost and then the monotremes are
almost
unknown outside of there. This this is
pretty normal bit of biology for animals
that were so dominant globally.
We know there were patches that were
largely unchanged, otherwise we wouldn't
have had the mammals surviving and the
crocodiles surviving and the birds
surviving and every newts and frogs and
everything that did survive.
I'm sure a few of those patches had some
dinosaurs in them, but it it is
ultimately what killed them.
What do you think is the chance that
they would have survived? So, you take
some local populations and they
flourish.
It's happened. Look at Look at
Australia. Um you know, the the
marsupials have done pretty well there
um for a very long time. You can imagine
if the next mass extinction,
you know, flattens a large chunk of
Indonesia, for example,
kangaroos could island-hop pretty
easily, make it to mainland Asia. But
then I mean, to then lead you take the
dinosaurs,
a small fraction survives, and then they
eventually repopulate the Earth again. I
mean, that's extraordinarily unlikely
cuz once your population's been crashed
like that, you do have the problems of
things like inbreeding or maybe you're a
great specialist to a certain area or
you're surviving because you're
isolated, you're in a you're in a valley
or you're on an island, and then
dispersing again becomes really or
breaking out into those areas becomes
much much harder. So, like the great
predators, like a even though the T-Rex
is such a great predator, that doesn't
that doesn't give you
>> Yeah, because because you've still had
the extinction event and the environment
is no longer what it was that you
evolved into.
Um and when once those systems start to
recover, those other animals are going
to adapt much better to them.
How's that make you feel?
That
that um
this
stupid asteroid from nowhere.
Well, I mean, at one level, I probably
wouldn't be here if it hadn't. So, I
mean, that's that's an interesting
question. I mean, do you think um
there's several ways of asking that
question, but if dinosaurs didn't go
extinct, do you think humans would still
be able to evolve?
I mean, my guess is probably not.
I don't I don't think I don't think it's
quite the um
What what was it? Uh Simon Conway Morris
had that book. Was it inevitability of
man that like even if you rewound it,
everything would come back? I'm I'm not
I don't think it's that far. Um I
certainly don't think it's um
anything like quite like the butterfly
effect of, you know, if one mammal had
been trodden on by one T-Rex, then
humans would never have evolved either.
We should say that the uh ancestor of
the primates or the closest There's a
lot of debate around this. Uh it's a
kind of tiny creature, Purgatorius, that
was our ancestor. Yeah, so this is us.
This is what we evolved from. Yes, uh
Scandentia, I think it's the group.
Basically a rodent. Yeah, I mean, there
were there were probably primates around
in the Cretaceous. Some of the molecular
clock stuff suggests that primates
were around alongside the dinosaurs,
though we've never found
um any osteological evidence of that.
But yeah, there's there's there's been a
backwards and forwards about were
dinosaurs already on their way out or
were they a bit limited by the very end
Cretaceous.
I think the more recent analysis has
shown that's probably not the case. So,
in other words, they were basically
doing fine um right up to the extinction
event. And so, yeah, if the asteroid
hadn't hit, there's no reason to think
that they were on some kind of
terminal decline.
Something else may have hit. There may
have been
um you know, some other environmental
disaster or something might have
happened, or maybe they're more
vulnerable to stuff
um
than we know of, but there's no I don't
think there's any really good reason to
think
they wouldn't have carried on relatively
well. I mean, even post-dinosaur
extinction,
you had a window where the mammals and
the birds were
pretty competing. There's a lot of big
birds getting going and various big
carnivorous terrestrial
kind of hyper-predatory ostrich-like
things, like the phorusrhacids. Um so,
there's no guarantee that mammals would
have even taken over post the dinosaur
extinction
um since initially they were in a bit of
a
a fair bit of competition. So, this is
just going to based on current
scientific understanding, human
evolution would be highly improbable if
dinosaurs hadn't gone extinct 66 million
years ago because dinosaurs dominated
ecological niches for everything,
basically. I mean, that's the
you look through Yeah, the Mesozoic,
the late Triassic,
dinosaurs are there alongside a whole
bunch of other big and unusual and
interesting reptiles and and some other
early
pre-mammal-like things that closer to
mammals than than the reptiles. But once
you've gotten into the Jurassic, you've
now got a solid like 120, 130 million
years
where almost anywhere on Earth, if you
saw an animal bigger than like a
raccoon, it was probably a dinosaur.
That's how incredibly dominant they you
know, as dominant if not more dominant
than modern mammals. But is it fair to
say that they were mostly
dumb?
I don't think so cuz I think I think
that comes down to a that bit of kind of
classical most Victorian
speciesisms,
and you get these insane hypotheses like
dinosaurs as a species or as a lineage
became senile, so they forgot to breed.
That was literally a suggested idea.
Uh you know, the mammals ate their eggs
and all of this kind of stuff, you know,
dinosaurs only lived alongside mammals
for a hundred million years. Be weird if
they all went extinct at the same time
because suddenly egg-eating evolved. Um
you know, you you've got problems like
this.
Um
But also again, that that general
speciesism, which you know, even goes
back to stuff like Linnaeus and his
taxonomic ranks and even give you stuff
like Aristotle. You've got like, you
know, humans are superior in some way,
and we're superior to the other mammals,
and of course, mammals are closest to
us, so they must be quite good. And then
they've got to be better than lizards,
and then lizards have to be better than
frogs, and frogs have to be better than
fish. So,
that that gets you into the well,
reptiles must be stupid.
And and they're not.
I I wonder if a human intelligence-level
organism could have evolved from the
dinosaurs. I mean, it's that's been
hypothesized plenty of times. Dale
Russell, a Canadian paleontologist, the
famous guy came up with this human-like
Troodontid that was done for a um TV
documentary. I think the one that
Christopher Reeve narrated. That I think
is a remake, but I've seen the original
that Dale had made for his TV show, and
it's still uh it's sitting in the
collections of the National Museum of
Nature in in Ottawa for Canada.
It's really really cool. It's like this
5-ft tall dinosaur-oid. That was it
there on the screen. Model of the
hypothetical dinosaur-oid on display at
the Dinosaur Museum in Ottawa. Or
Dorchester's in England. Yeah, I knew
there was a couple of copies of it.
Troodontid always comes back as like the
most intelligent dinosaur cuz it has
really quite a big brain for its size.
It does have a high encephalization
quotient, so it's always been
like tagged as like a very good
candidate for being the smartest
dinosaur. And basically, he just
hybridized that with a human, but of
course, why would these things end up as
like plantigrade quadrupeds, and why
would they go back to five fingers? And
actually, I think he's only got three,
to be fair. But he's got very human-like
feet. Why is it got no tail? What Why
would those things suddenly disappear?
There's no real reason other than just
kind of human exceptionalism.
But like I mean, you could argue
some parrots, some crows
are phenomenally intelligent and show
extremely clever behaviors on a par with
apes.
So, at some level, some dinosaurs were
extremely intelligent. I mean, yeah,
this is a whole 'nother conversation,
but all the tiny details that lead to
the explosion that is in the our
evolutionary tree that is Homo sapiens.
Like what is it the possible thumbs,
right?
Is it the invention of fire and the
meat-eating? Is it Is it some other
>> and predation pressure and then the
changing and changing environment. I
mean, the shrinking of the forests
pushing apes out of the trees into the
environment or into into the open
environment. And probably the same kind
of story could be told about the
dinosaurs about about anything, really.
Yeah, I mean, you I mean,
if you have 160 million years and a
global domination, but I mean, this is
the thing. You talked about like lost
behaviors, but like the lost lineages. I
wrote about this in one of my books, and
like you you want to find You want a
weird animal, you go to a volcanic
island. Like you go to New Zealand, you
go to Hawaii, you go to the Galapagos.
And yet, those are the places that
basically don't really form fossils.
So, you think the dinosaurs we know
about are strange, what was the stuff
knocking around there? We're never going
to know, sadly, but for everything you
think weird, you know, you think birds
are cool, think about penguins compared
to your average bird. Mhm. They live on
an ice shelf for 6 months of the year
and can't fly and
massively modified skeletons and you
know, you
compared to your average bird, penguins
are unbelievably weird. So yeah, take an
average dinosaur and take it to like
penguin level ostrich level even or
hummingbird level evolution.
There's going to be weirder stuff out
there than we found, much weirder.
If you travel back in time, you probably
your mind would be probably blown by the
weirdness. Yeah. Because those things
are almost always in small isolated
places that don't preserve fossils very
well. And so the odds of us ever coming
across them. I mean, you you see it to a
degree. So you've got um
the stuff that comes out of uh like what
is modern Transylvania was Transylvania
uh Hateg. That that's that was a series
of islands in the Mediterranean at the
end of the Cretaceous. And some of the
weirdest dinosaurs are from that chain
of islands. And that's not very isolated
compared to again something like Hawaii
or New Zealand. But it's fitting the
exact pattern. You you get dinosaurs on
islands, they turn weird. Um we we see
that. So again, dinosaurs were real
animals.
Like again, sounds sounds really
painfully obvious, but they they weren't
monsters. They followed
the same rules might be pushing it, but
certainly like guidelines. Like ecology
operates in certain ways. If you're
bigger, you need more food, but you're
more efficient. You just are. That's
pretty much just physics and scaling.
So big dinosaurs are going to follow the
rules of bigger animals and small
dinosaurs are going to follow the follow
the rules of smaller animals. They just
will.
Quite how they violate it in certain
ways by having
unusually long necks or unusual
physiology or eating an unusual diet or
because there was a weird plant that was
alive then that isn't now whatever it
may be. There's obviously a huge amount
of variation and uncertainty. But
fundamentally,
we know what makes animals and
ecosystems work and dinosaurs were
animals in ecosystems.
They're not that strange at some level
and therefore reconstructing
their actual biology is
challenging, but far from impossible.
Strange question. So as everybody knows,
dragons are obviously real.
I've been asked that on live TV
Only not with the sarcastic tone. Do you
do you dare disagree with this notion?
Yes, I I I I do. They don't. Wow. And
again, I They're real to me, so That's
fine.
But again, you know, we we kind of
touched on it, but I I I think there's
probably very little of any kind of
paleontological law that ended up in
things like Chinese culture with the
Chinese dragons and all of that stuff,
you know, that one comes up repeatedly.
The only one I do know of again from
Alberta
um is buffalo stones
uh that then apparently some of the
Native Americans had which are actually
bits of ammonites. So ammonites the
curly spiral shelled cephalopods are
related to octopus and squid.
Um so they have all these little
segments to the shells and the right
species and when they break open
they have like two little pairs of legs
and then a bulge and then a little bulge
and it looks very roughly like a bison.
And apparently these were
thought to be like somehow miniature
bison. Uh they're very rare because
ironically although the dinosaur bones
are extremely common
um it was very swampy and so you didn't
actually have a lot of sea coming in. So
you didn't tend to get things like
ammonites and ocean going animals. And
then the shell would have to break in
the right way. But apparently for the
local tribes sadly I can't remember who
it is in that bit of Canada. Um but
yeah, these were these were quite
valued. Um if you got a buffalo stone.
And I've seen a couple of them and yeah,
you have to squint a bit, but there's a
little buffalo. It's not far off. Um but
yeah, but that whole like were they
finding mammoth legs and were they
finding T-Rexes and was this inspiration
for this animal or this mystical animal?
I I don't think they were because you
just don't tend to find them like So
where where do you think like, you know,
cuz dragons show up in a bunch of
different myths?
>> Well right, but that's the thing. They
turn up in British mythology and we
barely got any dinosaurs here at all.
You
you only find them when you start
digging for coal mines which we weren't
doing in Is it basically a dramatization
of like
uh of snakes and lizards and stuff like
this?
>> and just general exaggeration and and
welding stuff together. I mean, that's
one thing you could put I guess
potentially argue is that
you know, yeah, we find Tyrannosaurs in
North America and in East Asia. In fact,
there's a whole bunch of stuff in the
end Cretaceous which is often very
common cuz it's a relatively recent
in the grand scheme of things in the
history of the world.
The fauna of East Asia
China, Mongolia, Eastern Russia is very
similar to what you get in Canada or in
the USA and down in Mexico.
And so
you find the same rough stuff. They
might not they're not exactly the same,
but you get ceratopsians, you get
Tyrannosaurs, you get the big as dark
and Tyrannosaurs, you get ankylosaurs
the armored ones
this, that, and the other.
So if these were influencing all those
different cultures
why don't Chinese dragons look like
Mexican dragons or equivalent of
thunderbirds or whatever? Well, because
it probably wasn't influencing them. If
produce the same kind of mythical
animals. Well,
you have to understand paleontology is
not perfect, so they were just
misinterpreting the bones.
>> Misinterpreting, yeah. Yeah. I mean,
dragons aside, I'm sure like we said
with the weirdness, there would be
creatures
that would be remarkable, right? You
look at it and you you might as well be
seeing a dragon. It could be I mean,
there's creatures alive in the sea
today. Yeah, I mean, if you if you if
you dredged up a colossal squid, I think
you'd have Yeah.
>> You know, or or even just dugongs and
manatees. I mean, they're
really quite
strange. And if you allow yourself to
marvel at the small things on Earth,
like I was in the Amazon jungle, like
the the insects, they're just like, what
is Yeah.
>> happening there? There's so many things
going on.
And there's Uh they're like hairy and
colorful and and probably poisonous and
they have teeth and what and And what
and all the little weird I've I've I've
several times I've pitched a book to
publishers where I want to write a book
that basically makes the point that
there is
almost nothing. I mean, you can always
dream up something totally ludicrous.
There is basically nothing in science
fiction that doesn't already exist on
Earth in some way, shape, or form. Yeah,
that is why I often think about alien
civilizations and aliens out there and
I'm very certain very certain that there
is aliens everywhere throughout the
observable universe. It's very strange
we haven't seen them, but it's
it's fun to marvel at what they possibly
look like because there's a huge variety
of organisms and species here on Earth
and you just expand that out to like
more and more Earths and
you could just imagine there's a lot of
weird Well, that's the thing. I think
most people, you know, understandably
I'm I'm a biologist and I particularly
pride myself on finding out about
particularly weird animals, but
yeah, I think people would be stunned
about some of the weird stuff that's out
there
that they just wouldn't realize are
real. You know, things like velvet
worms.
Um you know, it's just
blow your mind.
Uh you know, what's caecilians and stuff
like this and their and their
reproductive behavior. It's just
jaw-dropping. I mean, I love teaching
about them. I I do a class on diversity
of life and I do about eight weeks of
vertebrate diversity and I love just
dropping things in and the students are
like, what do you what do you mean that
exists? What do you mean something like
that's normal for this group? Yeah,
yeah, they do that.
What what from that? Like that class,
but everything you've studied with the
dinosaurs
what have you learned about the
evolution of life on Earth that
mechanism?
It's
it's really good.
It sound it sounds obvious, but it's I I
think
the bit that still fries my brain is
just like the raw numbers because I
think we're very bad at considering.
Like
I regularly talk about, oh, this is 70
million years old, but this is 78 and
this is 104. And people are just like,
oh my god, how on Earth do you deal with
those numbers? And I don't. They're just
numbers because I can't conceive of it
really any better than you can.
They are astronomical. Yeah, last
Thursday was quite a long time ago. 66
million years is mind-boggling. Like I I
I can't fathom it.
Um
but that's it. I think the evolution
thing is a my suspicion is quite a lot
of it happens
it's not quite Stephen Gould's
punctuated equilibrium, but I think
stressful events probably prompt a lot
more
than less stressful events and I you
know, population crashes and all these
things that then
odd things survive and then that's
changing your genetic component and all
the rest of it. But you you've just got
to remember that it's just it's almost a
numbers game.
Um
you know, it's a bad analogy of like,
oh, evolution is just rolling dice and
hoping you get all sixes. And it's like,
no, a friend of mine said, no, it's
rolling dice, but it gets to keep the
sixes. And then suddenly getting a
handful of sixes isn't that hard, but
also you're in the context of even rare
species, you know, ultra
I'm just short of stuff that like we've
nearly killed off, but like very rare
species have populations in the
thousands or hundreds of thousands and
are probably around for hundreds of
thousands of years. And very few, you
know, other than a a things like whales
and
apes and elephants mostly have dozens or
thousands of offspring at a time.
So a few thousand animals that have a
few thousand offspring at a time for a
few hundred thousand years. Yeah, it's
billions and billions and billions of
them.
That And that's the rare stuff. You look
at Mola mola, the ocean sunfish. Though
I think I think Mola's just been split
up into like five species. It's one of
the weirdest looking animals is love it
love it love it love it.
I mean what a what a fish that is.
Swims with a giant dorsal and I think
it's a giant anal fin and then they flap
alternatingly.
Does it have a face? Yeah. Yeah yeah
yeah little one at the front eat
jellyfish. Super open oceanic and they
get really big you see that one with the
diver. But I think these are the record
breeders for animals and they have
something like a hundred million eggs at
a time. Woah.
>> Don't quote me on that but it is
something in those kinds of numbers.
So yeah, that's you don't need a very
large population of sunfish
to start having an awful lot of
numbers.
He going to Google it and see if you can
find it.
Uh number of eggs or something. Yeah.
300 million. Oh, I under A single
A single female can release up to 300
million eggs at one time during a
spawning event. Boy.
These eggs are incredibly small
measuring about 1.3 mm in diameter.
That's still a lot of eggs when when you
think about it. It's not that small.
Yeah. What 300 million of of 1 mil is
still quite a bit. Uh fertilization is
external. Females release their eggs
into the water where males then
fertilize them.
Wow.
Man, there's a lot of different ways to
have sex I guess. This is
But but but but that's that's the bit of
evolution that I think I understand why
people don't get it. We are mostly
talking about
millions in population times millions of
years times thousands of offspring.
Yeah, it and it's kind of a numbers
game. Well, how could this evolve? Well,
the right selective pressure and when
you've got a hundred billion offspring
probably a few of them have And when you
focus in on a single species and trace
its history, you can see how effective
evolution is natural selection is and
then you just have to like go across
species and
But it's also a massive compromise which
is the bit that people always miss. You
know, it's
Darwin's line is descent with
modification. Yes, over time you can end
up with extraordinarily weird things but
mostly what's happening is you're
changing
something fairly simple. You're you're
making edits to the existing plan
which is why you don't have animals with
tentacles. They they have legs which
have joints which have fingers and they
all have one bone then two bones then a
bunch of little blocky bones and then a
few more and then the little ones that
make up the digits for hands and feet.
Basically everything has that
because you're modifying that pattern
and occasionally you get something weird
like
most of the modern lungfish have
basically reduced those down to well
they they had a more simple plan to
begin with but reduced it down to a
stump and then they got something like a
flaily tentacle.
But
yeah, you know, all snakes have got rid
of them or the various legless lizards
and things like that and the caecilians
and
um
all the rest but
yeah, it you're you're
subtly changing certain things in
certain ways is mostly what's going on
and then those build up over time.
But also against that compromise of
there's things that do and don't work.
There's things that are interlinked and
so you can't modify A without modifying
B.
Modifying A will kill you therefore B
never modifies because the two are
genetically linked in some way or
yeah, like the compromise of the lion's
mane. Making it darker makes you sexier
but more likely to kill you. You you I
think people think evolution is like
perfecting things in some way and
they're not that they're budge jobs. You
know, that's why we have a blind spot in
our eye but
things like squid don't. But that
process nevertheless does have
inventions in it. You have Tiktaalik,
you have a fish that learns to breathe
that crawls But it already had a swim
bladder that it was probably processing
a minimal amount of oxygen through and
the swim bladder evolved for a certainly
different function. Yeah, but that's one
of the powerful things about
evolution is switches the function.
Develops it for one function but once
you once you get there you're like okay,
this could be used for another function
that that leads to something that we in
retrospect can see as a major invention
which is the fish that's able to crawl
on land and all of a sudden we have
we have
cities and and rockets and yeah.
Tiktaalik specifically like there's
something really big
mind-boggling about a fish that crawls
out of the sea and you just the image of
that. Yeah, but it again we you've got
stuff that's not a million miles away
from that. You have things like frogfish
which are fully marine but kind of a
clamber through
seaweed and stuff and they've got pseudo
functional limbs. So again it's that
Tiktaalik is not weirdly derived
frogfish but it's not like
it's a fish that suddenly came on land
or a fish that suddenly evolved legs.
There was already that selective
pressure that was pushing it into a new
opportunity which gave it an
and then on and on and on and that's
what keeps going. But it also brings up
another thing going back to dinosaurs
and the behavior stuff which again I
think has been a problem is
um the functionality thing
and how there's always been I think this
big perception of
single traits having single functions
which isn't how a huge amount of biology
works. For some yeah, like eyes are used
for seeing they don't really do anything
else. Um but I think there's a lot of
again it comes down to a lot of sexual
selection stuff but things like horns on
Triceratops. That's probably quite good
for fighting off predators but it's also
quite good for fighting other
Triceratops. And then things like
elephants dig with their tusks as well
as fight other elephants as well as
fight lions as well as stripping the
bark off trees. So
you got to be very careful about how you
think of functionality in two different
ways.
One way is what possible things could
that thing do
and what possible things could have been
the main selective pressure before.
So you think about elephant tusks as I
say they do all these different things
but when an elephant's just got
the tiniest little nubs like the first
elephant whose teeth are growing the
wrong way and have pushed out of its jaw
and now it's got a couple of little
spikes.
It can't really dig a hole with them.
It's certainly not digging for water.
They're probably not great against a
predator cuz you'd basically have to get
on your knees to try and lean over and
try and stab it a bit.
But you can show off to the girls and
you can immediately fight another
elephant who's head to head the same
height as you and you've got a massive
advantage.
So evolutionarily
they probably started as some kind of
sexually selected feature.
But now functionally they are probably
compromised by the fact that
having the best fighting tusks but also
having the tusks that are best at
digging up water to keep you alive
during a drought
is putting selective pressure on that.
And those are
are those selections sexual selection
appears in both ends
those are two different things.
Digging for water is critical but it's
probably not what started it. And I
think that's where we get trapped with
things
like say the paddle tail of Spinosaurus
or stuff like or you know or T-Rex arms.
It's like well why are T-Rex arms like
that?
Well, maybe we need to consider what a
slightly longer arm is like or what it
was being functioned for in its
ancestors or how it works in other
species or what else it might do rather
than every paper is like did it do this
or did it do this or did it do this?
It's like you know, it could be all of
them.
That's a very different question to try
and answer but people don't tend to
think of it and it it ends up being very
binary and again biology is not like
that because it's a compromise. And it
may be wiser to then look at the
evolutionary origins how it first sprung
up.
>> Yeah, if you yeah, you know, what what
does a miniaturized version of this look
like and what might that function for or
how does it function in ancestral forms?
You know, a really good example of that
is giraffe necks which have been argued
about you know, forever and a day it was
giraffe necks are to help them feed up
high and then in the late 90s early
2000s there was a couple of papers
coming out going actually maybe it's
sexual selection and competition.
And then that drove down into arguments
about well what does a short neck look
like in the okapi? It's near as relevant
as what a short legs look like and how
do they work and
plus a whole bunch of other studies and
ultimately it came out that we were
right the first time. This is all about
feeding.
But it's a really interesting way of
thinking about it and looking at it.
Got to ask you the ridiculous question.
Uh we do have dinosaurs here on Earth
today. They're birds. Yep. Um ten and a
half eleven thousand species of
dinosaur. Are birds dinosaurs?
>> Yes.
Yeah, there's that It it's it's just a
yes. Yeah, it's
>> people know this by the way? So there's
there's an interesting one. I did a
radio show uh it's probably seven or
eight years ago now
with a couple of pres you know, drive
time afternoon nothing serious nothing
science or anything like that and I
mentioned something like this and one
presenter was oh my god, what do you
mean birds are dinosaurs? And the other
one is what do you mean you don't know
birds are dinosaurs? So it's hitting
that tipping point of common knowledge.
I think where
no, does does does does everyone know?
But no, but I think an awful lot of
people know and are now you kind of used
to it as an idea. So what's evolutionary
the connection between birds and
dinosaurs? The I mean they literally are
in the same way that we are apes and
mammals. Birds are dinosaurs. The
direct if you trace back the evolution
of all the birds so
hummingbirds and albatross and ostrich
and kiwi and parrots and pelicans and
penguins and whatever else and take them
down to their ancestral point and then
go back quite a few more million years,
their nearest relative to them is a
dinosaur. It is actually something very
close to Velociraptor.
Um or at least a small version of
Velociraptor. So, they birds have
literally descended from dinosaurs,
therefore they are dinosaurs. We have
literally descended from other apes, we
are apes. It it is that
form of evolutionary connection.
Throughout that whole process, did they
have feathers or did feathers come and
go?
>> So, fe- feathers are in Tyrannosaurs.
So, feather feathers go back at least
So, ironically,
cuz the fossil record is very
incomplete,
um most of the things that are closest
to birds we know from the early and late
Cretaceous. So, the last kind of 50
million years of
dinosaur evolution up to the extinction.
And actually, birds almost certainly go
back another 50 million years. So, birds
did not appear as a result of the
dinosaurs going extinct. Birds lived
alongside the dinosaurs for a hundred
million years.
This was This is the birds were not new
on the scene and it's all like, "Oh, the
dinosaurs died and from the ashes rose
the bird." No, they've been knocking
around forever.
>> They just survived cuz they're small. In
a very large part, yeah. That's that's
almost certainly what really helped
them. Um but birds took a kicking in the
KT extinction. So did mammals. Loads of
bird lineages went extinct and only a
handful got over the line, but they did.
But yeah, but we have feathers in as I
said, we've got middle Jurassic
Tyrannosaurs that are 165 million years
old, so 100 million years before the
extinction,
that have feathers. Simple feathers,
they'd be like those you get on most
baby chicks. So, they're not with the
big kind of
classic pick up a feather in you know,
in the street or on a field with the the
big vein up the middle and then the kind
of paired flat pieces. Um this would be
much more like a hair.
But we have them.
We've got something which is very close
to a bird, but might not quite be a bird
with modern bird with modern feathers.
Um in the middle Jurassic, we've got
definitive stuff like Archaeopteryx in
the late Jurassic and then into the
early Cretaceous, we have a series of
fossil beds in China which are just
heaving with them. So, yeah, and there's
Tyrannosaurs have feathers.
Velociraptors and the Dromaeosaurs had
feathers. Troodontids had feathers. Um
Ornithomimosaurs we've mentioned, they
had feathers and so did a whole bunch of
other groups as well. There's
that's about eight or nine kind of major
groups, kind of the size of something
like, yeah, literally like carnivores or
um deers, you know, some massive groups,
about eight or nine of them were fully
feathered as far as we can tell. So,
feathers massively predate bird origins,
but it was a major part of their
evolution. Do I understand why feathers
evolved? What the function the the the
the sexual selection signal or
>> Yeah, it's probably a a fundamental
twofold one, which is feathers insulate
you, they keep you warm and most
dinosaurs were
it's an archaic term, it's what most
people know, warm-blooded. So, they were
much more like us and birds. They had a
stable high body temperature regardless
of the environmental conditions.
And so, if you're burning a lot of
calories to stay warm, you want to kind
of keep that heat in. Feathers really
help you do that.
And then the other thing is yeah, the
obvious thing is sexual selection and
communication. Feathers do stuff that
scales can't. You can shed them in
winter and change color and come back as
another one. That's quite handy trick.
Um you can change them between juveniles
and adults. So, baby birds have one type
of feather, adults have a different one.
We know of dinosaurs that do that. Well,
we've got adults and juveniles with
different feather type types preserved
in the fossils. Um yeah, you can produce
all kinds of weird colors and displays.
You can you can erect feathers. You can
hold them up and fan them out like a
peacock or a pheasant. Whereas scales,
you can't really do that a bit or you
need a huge amount of bone like
Protoceratops.
So,
there's two good reasons that they would
probably evolve and exactly pulling them
apart or which is more important and
again, they're they're they're probably
bifunctional. As soon as you start
making feathers and making them more
colorful, well, you're staying warmer,
so that's an advantage. Or as soon as
you start making feathers to make them
warmer,
it probably won't be long until someone
evolves them to be a bit brighter red
and then we're back to, "Oh my god,
red!" Right, but but that's what's
happening and then they're going to
they're probably going to push each
other potentially. I mean,
it is true that the birds went real
crazy with the feather and the colors
and the prettiness and all that.
>> do.
I mean, maybe there's something about
feathers that allows for that efficient
sort of
uh diversification of fashion.
>> I think yeah, I think it gives them
opportunities that that
scales and solid structures simply
don't. I mean, you
the sole ability I mean, I'll say it
like, you know, peacocks and pheasants,
they are a massive disadvantage to males
when they've got all these extra plumes
on them cuz they're so big and heavy.
Peacocks can barely fly. But the fact
is, you can still kind of fold them up
into a fairly neat package and kind of
hide if you really wanted to. Whereas if
you're something like Triceratops, that
billboard on the stuck of on the top of
your head is not only enormous, but also
bone. It's massive, it's heavy and
you've got to lug it around the whole
year.
>> Whereas peacocks at least can go, "Well,
all the girls are settled down on their
nests now. I'm just going to get rid of
all this extra weight and dump it."
Just looking at the entire history of
Earth,
what has studying hundreds of millions
of years of evolution, studying this
epic age of the dinosaurs, what has that
done for your appreciation of what makes
Earth beautiful?
Do you ever just like sit back and like,
"Holy this is incredible. This
whole thing."
>> Yeah, yeah, I I I do. Um
but I guess
maybe not much more so than I would
anyway. Hm. As in,
I already
cuz again, I don't really think of
myself as a paleontologist in a lot of
ways.
Um
it's not that I don't love my work, but
it's
I'm a biologist and this is what I'm
looking at, but I'm fascinated and
amazed by lungfish and flying frogs and
caterpillars and onychophorans and
butterflies and a million and one other
hagfish and things that I think are cool
and interesting and fascinating and I
could happily read about them or watch
them in a zoo or documentary or
whatever it may be,
almost every bit as much as I would with
dinosaurs. I probably appreciate the
dinosaurs and pterosaurs
in a very different way because I have
such a greater intimate knowledge of the
science in a way that I try and read the
lion literature because I'm really
interested in predation dynamics, but I
I can't keep up with it whilst doing all
the other stuff as well.
>> Predation dynamics. Well, right. So, the
like the difference of like what prey
are they taking, why, at what
percentage, what what influences, how
are they competing with leopards and
Well, there's a literature body of
literature on this? Yeah. All right.
>> are studying lions and who what they
hunt and what they eat and where they do
it. There's a there's a whole bunch of
stuff on
particularly the the African carnivores
cuz there's so many of them and they're
so big and their populations
aren't terrible compared to like South
America or North America or or a lot of
Asia, for example.
Um
But yeah, if you go back to your
question, yeah, I like I could
appreciate all of it. It's all cool.
Some of it is definitely more awesome
than others. I work on some of the giant
pterosaurs, the ones with 10 m
wingspans. Hm. Yeah, and it's it's hard
like
uh
my partner's family's from Uganda and we
was in we were in Uganda last year. I
was watching
um marabou storks circle overhead and
you're like, "Wow, these things are huge
and amazing." And then I'm like, "Their
wingspan's about a fifth
of the stuff I work on. Actually, these
are quite pedaling in the grand scheme,
you know."
It's like thinking of it like an airline
going overhead. And when you think about
it in that context,
yeah, I mean,
cuz cuz that's it with the you know, I
know people tend to be obsessed with
size and you kind of get it. Like blue
whales are fundamentally cooler than
smaller humpback whales, even if
humpback whales are cool. Like it's hard
not to be impressed
Triceratops or Quetzalcoatlus or any of
these like ultimate giants. There's a
reason we love great white sharks.
There's a reason we love giant squid.
There's a reason we love lions and
grizzly bears and stuff, but
the dinosaurs do kind of do it better
than anyone else or you know, and
the you know, marine reptiles and the
flying reptiles,
cuz it's just so insane. Yeah, both size
and diversity. Yeah, and and longevity
as well. I mean, you you look at
you know, elephants have come and gone
and you know, the whales Okay, the
whales have reached superlative sizes,
but they're relatively new on the scene.
Um and could easily have gone extinct in
the last century.
But yeah, you know,
there's truly titanic dinosaurs for at
least a hundred million years. It's a
long time. It's hard It's sometimes
as you said, it's very hard to load in
just how long that is. They really
dominated Earth for a very long time.
>> Yeah, and and almost absolutely
everywhere. There's a handful of places
that we found where it appears that
dinosaurs didn't really get in and
something else kind of took over, you
know, like a bit like Australia with the
marsupials versus the
the other eutherians. Um but yeah,
fundamentally,
it it was a dinosaur planet for
after the the Triassic less so, at the
end of the Triassic when they're first
getting going. But yeah, Jurassic and
Cretaceous, yeah, it's it's a hundred
and forty-ish million years of
yeah, just absolute dominance. I think
it's hilarious and uh just perfect that
there's a giant
dinosaur head next to you and you didn't
mention it once during this
conversation.
>> Yeah, so yeah, cuz I thought I thought
we'd get it Well, I mean, giant isn't
absolutely any one. Um yeah, so So is
Protoceratops andrewsi
and I've done loads of work on
Protoceratops. It's from Mongolia. This
is a latest size juvenile. So I've I've
got a big head and the big head's kind
of like this, but I really couldn't fit
it in the bag.
>> So this is to to scale This is This is a
cast. So this is not This is not a This
is not original, but someone has molded
and copied it. So it's not even It's not
carved. It's a It's a
It's a cast and and a mold taken. So
yeah, this is 100% accurate to the
original specimen, at least
extraordinarily accurate to the original
specimen.
>> a young guy. Yeah. Um but yeah, I mean
at full size it's going to be like pig
or sheep size. So big, but not massive.
Um but I've got it partly cuz of It's
affordable cuz I can't afford to buy the
big skeletons and skulls. Um but I've
done a huge amount of work on it and in
part it goes back to those earlier
conversations about
populations. If you really want to
understand animals, you need an
understanding of what a real
population and a
growth of what these animals looks like.
And Protoceratops is, I would argue,
probably the only dinosaur where we can
really do that, or at least as close as
possible as you could get to any modern
animal as an analog. We've got well over
100 good skeletons. They're not
probably only about 70 or 80 in really
accessible museums. They're still a hell
of a lot. We have everything from Here's
a tiny baby one. This is a really not
cheap and nasty 3D print I had made. Um
but that's a hatchling sized one or not
much bigger than a hatchling sized one.
All the way up to the big adults. We've
now got embryos as well, which we didn't
have
um until about 10 years ago. So we've
got embryonic animals all the way up to
big adults.
They're all pretty much from one place
in
um Mongolia
and they are, as far as we can tell,
from a relatively narrow window in time,
only about 100,000 years, which in the
grand scheme of things is very close.
So you've got one population from one
place from one time with 100 from
embryos up to big adults.
So now if you want to look at, as I do,
something like sexual selection and when
does growth of the signal kick in and at
what size and what evidence for
dimorphism, well suddenly you've got a
population. You've got something you can
work with.
And that's why Protoceratops is so
important and I think way more important
than even a lot of my fellow
paleontologists realize and I genuinely
think we should be pouring a lot more
research into them because they can tell
us stuff that pretty much no other
dinosaur can. Because you have the
population data. So you can You can have
a lot more data.
>> it as a population. So going way, way
back to a conversation
about telling males and females apart,
and I said the big problem is
population data, or at least the number
of specimens that you have when mostly
you've only got one, two, or three.
Um
I did a big study on this a few years
ago on gharials, the really long-snouted
crocodilians from Nepal and India and
Pakistan with a giant bulge on the end
of the nose.
And even though the males are all bigger
than the females and the males all have
this weird nose growth, though that's
mostly soft tissue, but they have a
weird depression in the jaw
in the in the end of the snout where the
nostrils sit.
We got a sample size of something like
about 110 animals. So
these are very, very rare animals. So we
had to ransack every museum worldwide. I
was sending my students sending emails
to
huge numbers of people.
Have you got one sitting in your
collection lost? Can you get it for us?
Can you take these photos or these
measurements? We can measure it. We put
the data set together
and then we found that actually, apart
from the very biggest males, it's really
hard to tell males and females apart.
And this actually really closely matched
um some modeling data that I'd done with
a colleague, Jordan Mallon in Ottawa,
um looking at this for alligators and
and
trying to compare it to to dinosaurs.
Cuz although we talked about mutual
sexual selection before,
um
mutual sexual selection in particular,
you tend to get things that are
extremely similar. Males and females are
very hard to tell apart. But there's
also
it there's a gradient, you know, all the
way up to things like peacocks, all the
way down to you can't tell them apart
like parrots.
And for some features, when they take
time to get growing,
or because dinosaurs grow over a very
long window and are sexually mature over
a very long window, you run into the
problem that a big female will look like
a small male.
And we can't sex them. And lo and
behold, this is what you get with the
gharials. The really big males are
obvious cuz they're so much bigger and
they've got this big depression in the
in the snout.
But
medium-sized and big females look like
medium-sized or smaller males and very
small males.
And so yeah, that's basically what we
have with dinosaurs, even with
Protoceratops where we've got a data set
of like 100,
papers have come out saying there's very
mild sexual dimorphism or there isn't
sexual dimorphism.
Sexual dimorphism could be very strong
in Protoceratops,
but we can't find it because we can't
tell the males from the females
because we haven't ID'd enough through
something like medullary bone.
And so you're in this horrible situation
where, cuz going back to the T-Rex
thing, it's like, well, maybe it's
mutual sexual selection and therefore
they're cooperating and that would be
cool.
But also, maybe males are much bigger,
but we can't tell cuz our data set's too
small. Oh, that's frustrating. In which
case they're not under mutual sexual
selection and we've got it all wrong.
Yeah.
>> Maddening because it's so
If these were living animals, you'd just
watch them or you'd just genotype them
or you'd
sex them and you just know. And and we
just don't. But on the other hand, we do
have the mechanism to do it. There are a
handful of places where you get a bunch
of Protoceratops together where it's a
mass mortality site. Well, let's go and
drill every bone. Because if that's the
breeding season, we might find seven or
eight females and then the others are
pretty much by default males if we know
it's the middle of the breeding season
cuz all the others have medullary bone.
And now you know where your male-female
split is. Now let's analyze those two
data sets.
And then maybe we'll see a difference
and maybe we won't.
>> Yeah, I love how that that frustration
is sort of a catalyst for figuring out
you're like searching
for a place, a piece of evidence that
just shows you clearly
>> in. Yeah, there are ways in. There are
ways in. thing. Yeah, they're they're
all they're all ways in. And we maybe
got to get lucky because maybe it's not
the breeding season
or maybe that was just happened to be a
group of all males and therefore we're
we're not going to get the signal we're
looking for. But there's enough of them
and they're common enough. And yet still
digging in Mongolia, we keep finding new
species. We keep finding new cooler
stuff.
But I'm like, Can Can we dig up some
more Protoceratops? Because actually,
however cool these new things are,
genuinely, if you want to know what
dinosaurs are are and how they worked,
another 100 Protoceratops will actually
probably tell us a lot more than 50 new
species, however cool 50 new species
might be.
Paleontology is an incredible
discipline. It really is Sherlock Holmes
territory. So
uh this was an incredible conversation.
Um really grateful for all the work you
write that you put out there. The
The podcast is incredible. I just thank
you. Thank you for being you and thank
you for talking today. Well, thank you
very much for having me. I I hope I
haven't worn out my welcome with
dinosaur No,
talk for many more hours. Thank you,
brother. Thank you, Dave. Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you for listening to this
conversation with Dave Hone.
To support this podcast, please check
out our sponsors in the description and
consider subscribing to this channel.
And now, let me leave you with some
words from Carl Sagan.
Extinction is the rule.
Survival is the exception.
Thank you for listening. I hope to see
you next time.